CHAPTER X

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM
I.

METHODS OF PROPAGATION

If one were to investigate the means by which Lutheranism established and propagated itself, he would first of all discover the cunning
practice of concealment which was indicated towards the close of the
preceding section of this work.
The divine service was essentially altered, but suspicion was avoided
as much as possible by retaining the external form, so that the common people, as Luther said, “would never become aware of it.” It was
to be done “without scandal.” * In justification of this procedure, he
asserted that the new religious practices must be “propagated without injury to charity.” Thus it ought to be done, he wrote on a sub-

sequent occasion, “if we are not to unsettle and confuse our churches
without accomplishing anything against the papists.” Melanchthon
shared this view. “The world,” he said, “is so much attached to the
Mass that it seems well-nigh impossible to wrest people from it.” 2
Hence, Luther, as a matter of principle, more frequently adopts a
calculated accommodation than his impulsiveness would lead one to
expect. When Martin Weier, a young student of good family from

Pomerania, who was about to return home, asked him how he should
behave in the matter of divine worship in the Catholic surroundings
of his home and towards his father, who professed the ancient faith,
Luther, according to his own account, told him “to fast, pray, attend Mass, and revere the saints, just as he had been doing before,”
but try to enlighten his father as much as possible; he would commit
no wrong if he “took part in the Mass and other profanations for his
father’s sake.” 8 Yet, when referring to his previous practice of cele-

brating Mass in the monastery, Luyther declared that he had offended
1 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 321 sq.
2]b., p. 322.

81b., p. 323.
'

221

25

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

God most horribly, more so than if he had been “a highwayman or
kept a brothel.”
It was, undoubtedly, a serious matter thus to deceive the people,
who, owing to the retention of the ancient ceremonies, regarded
the service of the reformers as Catholic. Cochlaeus, in a tract,
speaks of Luther’s “hypocritical deception” of the masses. ¢ I..ut.her
was pleased to see that, despite the contrary urging of many an impetuous fanatic, his principle maintained the upper hand, namely,
that anyone unable to understand the sermon, “be he a layman,
whether Italian or Spaniard, seeing our Mass, choir, organs, bells,
chantries, etc., would surely say that it was a regular papist church,
and that there was no difference, or very little, between it and his
own.” ®
The progress of Lutheranism was much aided by the favorable
moral impression which the new movement made upon many, even
well-intentioned Catholics. The reformers’® frank criticism of existing evils attracted many who longed for an amelioration. The bold

proposals to pursue other paths, brought forward by Luther with an
air of intense zeal, allured the masses and their leaders. People heard

of interior Christianity, which was to be opposed to exterior semblance, and of a spiritual liberty which was to overcome selfrighteousness. A grand upward flight of virtue appeared to arise
from
the deceptive teaching that everything was to be done at the
inspiration of a perfect love, without regard to the motive of
fear or the

expectation of reward. Seductive words were heard
calling Christ

the sole Saviour, who redeemed mankind without any

merit on its

part, and of the unconditioned rule of grace withou
t human cooperation, which is really nothing but sin. These
and other errors,

which were dangled before the eyes of men, influen

intentions were good, but who did not investigate

ced many whose

more deeply. Only

by and bye the true nature of the innovation as a
complete religious
revolution revealed itself to those who were able
to see more clearly,
especially after the publication of Luther’s “Addre
ss to the Nobility”
and his work “On the Babylonian Captivity.”
Of those who afterwards combated the Refor
mation successfully
41b, p. 322,
51b. Actention is called to the many
borrowings from the Catholic cult still
found
among
the

Protestants

of

Denmark,

Norway,

and

the

duchies

the Danish crown, as a consequence of
the method of conceal

by Luther’s disciple, Bugenhagen.

formerly united

with

ment introduced in the North

METHODS OF PROPAGATION

223

with their pens, quite 2 number at first were prepossessed in favor of
Luther and his proceedings, e. g., Cochlaeus, Zasius, Witzel, Billikan,
Vitus Amerbach, the aged Wimpfeling, and the humanist Willibald
Pirkheimer. Especially among the humanists there were deserving
men who at first favored, or at least maintained an indifferent attitude towards, the Wittenberg reform movement, such as John Fabri,
who afterwards became bishop of Vienna, and John Faber, the Dominican prior of Augsburg, who later opposed the movement when
it unmistakably revealed its true nature. Even Erasmus, much as he

had favored Luther’s procedure, joined the ranks of his determined

opponents in 1§24. Other intellectuals were misled in joining Luther
by the semblance of reform proclaimed by him; and in the case of

some, their allegiance to him was lasting and sincere, and in some instances fanatical. One of these literary men thus taken in was

Hartmuth (Hartmann) von Kronberg, a knight who could not go far
enough in his enthusiastic support of the Lutheran cause. Prompted
by “piety,” he petitioned the emperor to treat the pope “as an apos-

tate and a heretic,” if he refused to renounce his claims. In his re-

ligious enthusiasm Kronberg wished to see all ecclesiastical goods
confiscated, and published a pamphlet in which he outlawed every
Catholic priest who remained loyal to the ancient Church and stated

that it was permissible to treat such “in much the same manner
as one treats a ravening wolf, as spiritual thiefs and murderers in

word and deed.” His Protestant biographer styles Kronberg a man of
“ynshakable character, though somewhat narrow-minded.” ® Such
to
types were naturally rare, but many showed 2 steadfast devotion
the cause of Luther, which they regarded as noble.

Of far greater influence upon the masses who joined the Reforgly good
mation than the attractive force of the good or seeminon
of opaboliti
the
for
d
features of the movement was the deman
ts
ndmen
comma
the
that
pressive ecclesiastical burdens. The assertion

apostasy. The
of the Church were not binding opened the door to
hierarchy,
ruling
the
abolition of confession, of the laws of fasting, of these and
the
and the assertion of the dissolubility of matrimony—was sure to all
captiother gifts of the new Evangel to the free Christian ication by faith
vate many. Above all else, the easy doctrine of justif
alone was sure to meet with a friendly reception.
George Witzel (Wicel), who was a Lutheran for a while, wrote
® Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 325 syq.

224

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

subsequently: “Oh, what a grand doctrine that was, not to be obliged
to confess any more, nor to pray, nor to fast, nor to make offerings,
nor to give alms. With these you ought surely to have been able to

catch two German lands, not one only with such a bait, . . .” 7
Many clerics who had grown weary of the duties of their state, and
desired to marry, flocked to Luther’s banner. Convents and monas-

teries opened their portals and monks and nuns who had selected the

monastic life without a vocation or who, enticed by the pleasures of

the world, had become disgusted with their vows, left the sacred

precincts and

doffed their habits. The number of clerics who,
prompted by worldly motives, joined the new religion and came to

Wittenberg to receive appointments as preachers, was so great that

Luther exclaimed: “Who can deliver us from these hordes?” The ex-

ample of the married Wittenberg leaders proved exceedingly enticing.
The ranks of the priests who contracted marriage, as mentioned
above, were augmented in 1522 by Dr. Justus Jonas and John Bugenhagen. The former, who had been forced upon the monastery of All
Saints as provost and who, in his capacity of professor of theology,
proved to be one of the most distinguished assistants of Luther, con-

tracted a solemn marriage with 2 woman of Wittenberg and defended his conduct in a book specifically directed against Faber’s de-

fense of celibacy. Bugenhagen, a Pomeranian, was likewise one of
the first adherents of the new religion. He had been 2 priest and
teacher of a convent-school at Treptow, and took up his residence
at Wittenberg, where, in 1523, he was forcibly installed as pastor of

the local church by Luther and the town council. He had married
the previous year.
When Erasmus heard of the growing number of married priests,
he penned the sarcastic words: “Many speak of the Lutheran affair
as a tragedy; to me it appears rather as a comedy, for the movements

always terminate in a wedding.” 8

In the various departments of public life the word “liberty” produced favorable results in behalf of the Lutheran apostasy. In many
places where the municipal authorities were engaged in a stru ggle with
the territorial jurisdictions of the episcopate, joining the new religion
or the threat of apostasy became a slogan in the battle for civil
rights,
T 1bid., pp. 313 sq.
_
8 Letter of March 21, 1528, on the occasion of the marriage
of the monk Oecolampadius.
Cf. Theod. Wiedemann, Job. Eck, p. 246.
.

METHODS OF PROPAGATION

22§

The temptation to obtain high office and to appropriate the property
of the Church was too strong to be resisted. The desire to obtain relief from economic pressure through the adoption of the new religion penetrated even to the peasants. In many places the rural pop-

ulace, like the inhabitants of the cities, were affected by the mighty
agitation which was conducted by means of the spoken and the
printed word on behalf of the new ideas. Dissatisfied clerics joined in
the agitation. It was a veritable mass suggestion. The indescribable
power of Luther’s pen, his forceful language, which was carried to
the lowest classes of the population and excited all the instincts of
opposition to the Church, actually induced a sort of popular hypnosis.
The hero, such as every profound popular movement necessarily re-

quires, was at hand. The evil conditions existing in State and
Church furnished a fateful resonance to his voice. The apocalyptical
expressions which he employed, supported by drastic wood-cuts,
verses and songs, impressed the imagination and powerfully affected
the emotions. The seed he sowed found a soil which was all the more
favorable as it had not as yet been overrun by any other literature or
public agitation, but offered, as it were, a virginal susceptibility.
In addition to all this there was the resort to force—force on

the part of the civil authority for the purpose of introducing the new
system of religion and advocated by the theological leaders to be
exerted upon all who were exposed to their pressure and violence.

The conduct of the civil authorities, especially in the electorate of
Saxony, will be discussed more fully in the sequel. These authorities
imitated the agitators, Anabaptists and others, in the application of
violence.

Luther’s personal method of procedure was marked by forcible
measures in certain places soon after his return from the Wartburg.
In these places, as well as elsewhere, the forbearance and consideration which he had recommended yielded to violent disciplinary pen-

.
alties, when it appeared to be to the advantage of the new Evangelfirst

He had, it is true, recommended to Gabriel Zwilling, his
preacher who labored in Altenburg, that he should “liberate the consciences of men solely by means of the Word.” He said he had prom-

his
ised his sovereign (prudence had compelled him to do so) that
inian
adherents would observe this rule.? But when the loyal August

9 “You must refrain from innovations . . . I gave my word to the prince, etc.”

Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, pp. 314, 316 3qq.
)
i

|
|

1

(See

226

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

canons of Altenburg, who had for generations exercised the uncontested right of appointing the pastor of the local parish, denied the
new preacher permission to take possession of their church, Luther
addressed a letter to the city council, whose members favored him, and
as a consequence the council claimed the right of nominating Zwilling
to the position.
.
In this letter he maintained that aldermen existed not merely for

the sake of temporal government, but were also obliged “by brotherly Christian love” to intervene in behalf of the Gospel. For the
rest, everyone had the right to repel ravening wolves, such as the

canons and their disturbing provost, who, ensnared by false doctrines,
unjustly collected the ecclesiastical tithes, and relied on the councils

of the Church, whereas the Scriptures did not empower a council, but
“every individual Christian” to “judge doctrine and to recognize

and avoid the wolves.” The canons were told to “observe silence, or
teach the new Gospel, or depart.”
Violence was resorted to. With the consent of the Elector, Luther’s
friend Wenceslaus Link, of the Augustinian Order, was appointed
to the position in dispute, in place of Zwilling, who was too indiscreet.
This was in the summer of 1522. In February, 1523, Link resigned
his position as vicar-general of the Augustinian congregation, chose

a wife, and was “married” by Luther himself at Altenburg over the
protest of the courageous canons, who, although sorely persecuted,

remained in the city with the other faithful clergy and personnel of
their Order.
In order to sketch the fate of Altenburg during the next few years

—a fate which became typical—it should be mentioned that Link,

in 1524, succeeded in having the municipal council forbid the Franciscans, who were very much beloved in that city, to celebrate Mass

in public and to preach and hear confessions. At the same time the
municipal council, in a written address to the Elector, declared that,
according to the Old as well as the New Testament, rulers were
not

allowed to tolerate “idolatry.” The bailiff was given a free hand. In

August, 1525, Spalatin, after resigning his office of court-pre
acher
upon the death of the Elector Frederick, took over Link’s position

in Altenburg and married Catherine Heidenreich on Novemb
er 19.
Luther had preceded him. It was an inevitable consequence of Spala-

tin’s marriage that the canons of Altenburg declared his position

and

benefices forfeited. Serious conflicts resulted from this action
in a

METHODS OF PROPAGATION

227

" city already torn by religious dissensions. Luther demanded from
John, the new Elector of Saxony, the suppression of Catholic wor~ship at Altenburg, the “Altenburg idolatry,” as he styled it, among
other offensive invectives. Soon after Spalatin directed to the court a

similar demand couched in no less offensive terms, followed by a

second demand in January, r526. It must be considered, he wrote,
“that many a poor man would readily embrace the Gospel, if that

miserable idolatry were abolished.” At the most, the canons might
be permitted “to conduct their ceremonies in the greatest secrecy,

behind closed doors, without admitting any other person.” On February 9, Luther, referring to Altenburg, memorialized the new
Elector, who was very accommodating to him, along the following
lines:

As a ruler he was bound in conscience *“to attack the idolaters” and
to suppress “the false, blasphemous cult” as much as possible. Did he
wish to be responsible to God for the criminal abominations by supplying the foundation with tithes and property, as heretofore? More-

over, a secular ruler should not tolerate that contradictory preachers
(i. e., such whose teachings were at variance) lead his subjects into

dissension and schism, whence rebellion and mutiny may ensue. “One

and the same doctrine should be preached in the same locality.” “For

this reason,” he added, “Nuremberg has silenced its monks and closed

its monasteries.”

By means of the deceptive principle of “one doctrine for the same

locality” he rests his intolerance upon 2 plausible foundation which
was satisfactory to the mediocre intelligence of the prince. The subversion of the whole political order in the electorate, as well as elsewhere, was thereby accelerated.

The solution of the Altenburg problem was thus made dependent
canupon the conscience of the somewhat pietistic ruler. Should the shall
“it
ence,”
consci
ons, says Luther, attempt *“to apply their own
avail them naught” because they cannot prove their positiontofrom
Scripture! And if they should complain that “they are forced emto

dden
brace a certain doctrine, that is not true; they are only forbi
a cult which

practicing
give public scandal.” They are prevented from
ed in Scripture.”
they themselves “must confess is not found

of force which
Such was the pitiful justification of that brutal use ics
at Altenbecame habitual afterwards. But the loyal Cathol
burg offered determined resistance. When the Lutheran visitators

228

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

came to exercise their office, in 1528, the town council informed
them that there were still “many papists in the city,” yea, that the
whole district *“fairly swarmed with monks and nuns.” It was an
honorable testimony to Catholic loyalty, the like of which was also
found in other places.
From the introduction of the new Evangel into Eilenburg, in 1522,
we learn what was Luther’s leading idea: “It is the duty of the sovereign, as a ruler and brother Christian, to drive away the wolves and to
be solicitous for the welfare of his people.” 1® On the occasion of
a first and second visit to Eilenburg, Luther had discovered that the
magistrates of that place had failed to show the proper zeal. Like the
authorities of many other places, they were desirous of increasing
their own power and influence; but their Catholic conscience checked
the majority of them. The prince was to remedy this defect by the
exercise of his authority. With the aid of Spalatin, Luther at once
proposed two new preachers for Eilenburg, of whom one was to be
summoned by the town council under the influence of the court,
whilst at the same time the afore-mentioned statement about the
wolves was to be shown to the sovereign. Thus the matter was settled

in a bureaucratic manner with the co-operation of the prince. An-

drew Kauxdorf, a native of Torgau, was finally recognized by the
magistrates as preacher, entered Eilenburg in 1522, and was permitted gradually to Lutheranize the people who refused to embrace

the new religion.
Where the magistrates were unwilling, the powerful nobility, at
Luther’s instigation, frequently used violence to bring about a change.
Thus, to cite but one striking illustration, Count Johann Heinrich
of Schwarzburg became the founder of Lutheranism in his terri-

tories in virtue of a decree authorized by Luther.!! His father, Count

Giinther, who was loyal to the Church, had legally confirmed the
monks at Schwarzburg in the possession of their parishes; now, Johann
Heinrich asked Luther how he might deprive them of their rights
and possessions in favor of a preacher of the new Evangel. Luther
replied on December 12, 1522, that Count Giinther had naturall
y expected the monks to preach the Gospel, but if witnesse
s could
testify that they did not preach the true Gospel (of Luther)
, but
papistical heresies, the Count would have the right,
nay, the duty, to
10 1bid., p. 319.

111bid., p. 318.

AUXILIARIES FROM THE MONASTERIES

229

oust them from their parishes. “For it is not unlawful,” he says, “indeed, it is absolutely right to drive the wolf from the sheepfold. . . .
A preacher is not given property and tithes in order that he
should do injury, but that he should labor profitably. If he does not

work to the advantage of the people, the endowments are his no
longer.” This principle was promptly applied at Schwarzburg. The
Count seized the properties and revoked the privileges which his
father had given to the Church. Monks and parishes were subjected
to violence, and the new Evangel was introduced.
Luther’s reply concerning temporal possessions, taken in connec-

tion with certain other statements made by him, reveals an idea truly
revolutionary in its consequences. It indicated that, if the clergy refused to preach the new religion, in Germany and in the Church in
general, ecclesiastical possessions were no longer secure. Lutheranism
needed but to apply this principle, which, undoubtedly, it was

strongly tempted to do. If only those priests, abbots, bishops, and
other spiritual rulers were to continue in the possession of their benefices who used them to promote the Lutheran innovation, then the
foundations of order were overturned. Wyclif and Hus had proclaimed similar doctrines, and the Christian State had been able to defend its legal structure against them only by taxing its energies to the

utmost. It is hardly probable that Luther realized in advance all the
consequences of his decision in the Schwarzburg affair, though practically it had been acted upon ever since the beginning of the new
movement. Only prudent regard for the electoral court prevented
the rigorous carrying out of this decision.

2. AUXILIARIES FROM THE MONASTERIES

Lichtenberg in the Saxon Electorate affords an example of how
ant
Lutheranism gained ground by enticing the occupants of importsento
clerical positions to violate the vow of celibacy. The appeal
sed before
suality served as a stimulant. Whereas the measures discuscompu
lsion
were coercive, we have now to consider a kind of moral

those who set the
whose power over mortal man was fully realized byby
which Luther
letter
the
t
respec
this
evil passions in motion. In
enberg is an
Licht
in
on
religi
of
e
prepared the way for the charig
s monastery
famou
a
was
there
city
extraordinary document. In that
It was
tine.
Augus
St.
of
rule
of Antonine monks, who followed the

230

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

governed by Wolfgang Reissenbusch, a doctor of laws and a former
student of the University of Wittenberg. He was bound to his Order
by solemn vows, and discharged the office of “preceptor” of the
monastery and administrator of its property. Luther’s friends reminded him that Reissenbusch, notwithstanding his scruples, could
probably be prevailed upon to marry—a matter which he had already
discussed with him. Luther sent him an open letter, which was published at Wittenberg under the title: “A Christian Letter Addressed
to Wolfgang Reissenbusch,” etc. In it he tries to impress the recipient,

as well as all others who are similarly situated, with every conceivable
reason to induce them to violate their vow of chastity by an immediate marriage.
As a man, he says, Reissenbusch was “created for and compelled by God
Himself to embrace the married state.” The monastic vow is void because it

demands the impossible. To keep chastity is “‘as little within our power as
to work miracles.” As long as one is neither an angel nor a spirit, we are
told, “God in no wise bestows or grants this privilege.” He who takes such a
vow relies “upon works, and not upon the grace of God;” he “takes his
stand upon works and commandments” and denies “Christ and the faith.”

Then follows a detailed, and, in some places, disgusting exposition of the
alleged inevitable necessity of sexual intercourse. The non-satisfaction of
the sexual instinct in matrimony had resulted in immorality among the
entire clergy and in all the monasteries. Luther overwhelms his tempted
friend in sinister language and with a demoniacal style intended to excite the
passions. “It is necessary that you be urged thereto, that you be exhorted,

driven, incited, and encouraged. Well now! dear sir, I prithee, why do
you wish to delay and meditate, etc.? It must not, it ought not, and it will
not be otherwise. Banish the thoughts from your mind and go ahead joyously!” True he would thereby become a “matrimonial mantle covering the
disgrace” for others; but Christ, too, had become “the mantle that cloaks the
disgrace of us all.” 2
The reference to Christ is repulsive. That holy name ought rather to have
reminded him of the admonitions of Christ and His disciples, which were
the very antithesis of his own exhortations. It should have recalled to him
the words which served as a guiding star throughout all the centuries
for those who voluntarily bound themselves by a vow of chastity.
It should also have reminded him of the grace of Christ in which he who
12 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 270-279; Erlangen ed., LIII, pp. 286 sqq. (Briefwechsel,
V., p. 145), letter of March 27, 1525. Finally Luther says (ibid.): “It is but a matter
of a
brief hour of disgrace, to be followed by years of honor.”

AUXILIARIES FROM THE MONASTERIES

231

makes this sacrifice places his sole reliance and whereby that which appears
impossible to the world is rendered easy and a source of joy. In lieu of these,
we have alluring descriptions of the irresistible force of the sexual instinct.

Reissenbusch yielded to Luther’s persuasion, bade farewell to the
Order to which he had bound himself by a solemn vow, and married
Hanna Herzog, the daughter of a poor tailor’s widow at Torgau.
With the connivance of the Elector he retained his clerical office as
“preceptor” and the endowments entrusted to his Order. For the pur-

pose of inviting others to imitate his example, the incident was ex-

ploited in the press by Bugenhagen, the Lutheran pastor of Witten-

berg, who addressed to the happy groom an “Epistola Gratulatoria
de Coniugio Episcoporum et Diaconorum” which he also caused to
be published in German. Such great importance was attached at Wittenberg to the marriage of priests and monks as an auxiliary factor
in the extension of the new Evangel.

,

Already at a previous stage of his career Luther had approached,

among others, the Order of Teutonic Knights, urging its members
to break their vows by marrying. Unfortunately, discipline had declined among these Knights, so that he had reason to hope that they
would respond to his public invitation. Like the priests of this Order,
the knights, too, were bound by a voluntary vow of chastity. Their
contact with the world exposed them to special danger. The general
reform by means of which Adrian VI endeavored to check the decline
of their monastic discipline, proved to be but partially adequate in
view of the dissensions that prevailed among the rulers of the Teutonic Order, especially since the Grand Master of the Order, Albrecht
von Brandenburg, a cousin of the Elector Frederick of Saxony, was
himself favorably inclined towards Lutheranism. After receiving 2
visit from the Grand Master at Wittenberg, on November 29, 1523,

Luther wrote his “Exhortation to the Knights of the Teutonic Order
to Avoid False Chastity and Embrace Lawful Matrimonial Chastity,”

which was at once published in German.*?

In this work, the author depicts matrimony in alluring colors, as the
proper thing for their state. He tells the knights who had secret and illicit
such
relations with women, ‘‘not to despair in weakness and sin,” becausewife”
lawful
a
‘“‘take
to
than
extra-matrimonial relations were “less sinful”

13 Weimar ed., Vol. XII, pp. 232 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIX, pp. 16 sqq. Grisar, Lutber,

I, 116sq., 317 sq.

232

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

with the consent of a council of the Church, supposing such a permission
were given.'*
In conclusion he says that Christ had reserved to Himself certain bishops
who would resign from their office or transform it into a genuinely episcopal
office for the sake of the Gospel. Many a bishop or abbot would marry, he
says with a significant hint to weak ecclesiastical dignitaries, if the path
were only blazed for them and wooing were no longer regarded as a disgrace
and a danger.

These alluring appeals did not fail to attain their object in the
case of those members of monastic orders to whom they were addressed. With the same energy Luther set about the task of winning
over the episcopate, ridiculing the bishops who refused to heed
him. When, in compliance with an imperial mandate, the bishops
of Meissen and Merseburg proceeded with their visitations and called
to account the clerics who had married, he issued a tract in which
he gave full vent to his irritation against the hierarchy (1522).

His main intention was to brand the higher clergy as immoral and
to strengthen his appeals to the lower clergy to marry and preach

the pure Gospel. This tract bore the title: “Against the Falsely Named
Clerical State of the Pope and the Bishops.” 13 In this work he calls

himself an “evangelist by the grace of God,” declaring he had the

same right to style himself thus as they have to call themselves
bishops, since he was certain that Christ regarded him as such and
would testify in his behalf on the day of judgment.
Here, too, he teaches that the sexual impulse can be controlle
d in the

clerical state as little as fire can be deprived of its power to burn; that
it
is either “all fornication” or “impure, involuntary, miserable, lost
chastity.”
There is “scarcely one among a thousand who lives an upright
life.” These
few are “God’s special miracles.” Pope and bishops permit innocent
men

to be sacrificed “to Moloch, the fiery idol.” “Monasteries and
convents are
gates of hell, where the faith (i.e., his faith) is not practice
d with honesty
and vigor.” 2®* He does not tire of censuring them
because of their
corrupt life.
'

But, he interposes, will not a revolt be the final outcome

against the episcopate? What about it? “It would be

terrible reply—*“that all the bishops were murdered,
1% Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 120.

of his attitude

better”—thus runs his

that all the monasteries

15 Weimar ed., Vol. X, pp. 105 sqq.; Erl. ed.,
Vol. XXVIII, pp. 141 sqq.

16 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1.

AUXILIARIES FROM THE MONASTERIES

233

and convents were uprooted, than that a single soul should perish. Of what
use are they but to live voluptuously by the sweat and toil of others?” **
As an ecclesiast by divine right he boldly issues “Doctor Luther’s Bull and
Reformation,” which begins with the solemn declaration: “All who stake
their lives, their property, and their honor, that the bishoprics are destroyed
and the episcopal régime is exterminated, are dear chilldren of God and

true Christians, who observe God’s commandments and combat the devil’s
régime. . . . All who sustain the rule of the bishops and are subject to
them by voluntary obedience, are the devil’s very own servants and militate
against God’s order and law.” To this inflammatory appeal to violence,
however, he appends the modifying clause that he does not wish to destroy

with “club and sword,” but, as “Daniel teaches (VIII, 25), the Antichrist
shall be broken without hand, so that everyone, with God’s Word, will talk,
teach and stand firmly against the Antichrist, until he be confounded,
abandoned, and despised, and come to grief of his own accord. That is a true
Christian agitation for which one should stake his all.” **

Besides the extirpation of the episcopate, Luther had at heart
particularly the emancipation of the nuns. Soon after his Wartburg
days, he dedicated two tracts to the “pious children” among the

nuns, who were desirous of hearing the voice of the Gospel. One of
these, published in April, 1523, bears the title: “Reason and Reply,
why Virgins may leave Convents with Divine Sanction.” The other
is entitled: “Story of How God Aided 2 Nun.” In contrast with the

preceding appeal to agitate, the latter reads almost like an idyl. It
was intended to inspire other nuns to leave their convents.

The occasion of the former publication 1 was furnished by twelve
Cistercian nuns, who fled from their convent at Nimbschen near

Grimma, with the assistance of 3 town-councilor, Leonard Koppe of

Torgau. Nine of these fugitive nuns came to Wittenberg. Among
them were Catherine von Bora and a sister of Johann von Staupitz.

According to Luther, this pamphlet was written expressly to ilJustrate how all nuns should liberate their consciences and save their
souls. To the objection that such clandestine flight, combined with
a denial of the monastic vow, gives rise to scandal, he replies: “Away
with scandal! Necessity knows no law and gives no scandal. . . .
17 Ksstlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 517.

Grisar,
18 For contrary utterances, see Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 44sqq. Likewise
and especially

Lutherstudien, VI (Kampfbilder, Grisar and Heege, Heft 1IV), pp. 126 sq.,
PP. 137394

19 Weimar ed., Vol. XI, pp. 394 sqq.; Erl ed,, Vol. XXIX, pp. 33 saq.

234

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

I should consult my soul; let the whole world be scandalized!” It
is interesting to note Luther’s confession that he had himself, with
the aid of Koppe, planned the escape of the twelve nuns, who had

been enlightened by his writings. They were mostly daughters of
the nobility, who had been committed to the convent according to
custom and hence failed to honor the state of life which they had

embraced voluntarily. Their lodging with relatives or families in
Wittenberg was a source of no small anxiety to Luther, since he
feared that opportunities of marrying them off might not present
themselves so readily.2?
After several weeks, three more nuns were abducted from the
convent of Nimbschen

by their families. Simultaneously sixteen
escaped from the convent at Widerstett in Mansfeld, of whom five
found lodging with Count Albrecht of Mansfeld, who was very
friendly to the Lutheran cause.
The heroine of Luther’s “Story of How God Came to the Aid of
a Nun” was Florentina of Oberweimar, who had abandcned her

convent at Neu-Helfta, near Eisleben.?! She told Luther of alleged

bodily torments inflicted upon her because of her religious views.
Luther willingly believed her story and immortalized her in a publication which he addressed to Count Albrecht of Mansfeld as a “sign

in confirmation of the Gospel”’—which sign one may not overlook

with indifference.?? In compliance with the rule of her Order,
Florentina had completed her year of probation and taken the vows.

Having imbibed other ideas from the writings of the reformers,

she was subjected to penalties by her superioress and kept in strict
custody. But behold, O miracle, one happy day in February, 1524,
“the person who should have locked her up, left her cell open” and

she escaped! “God’s word and work,” Luther writes in all serious-

ness, “must be acknowledged with fear; nor may His signs and

wonders be cast to the winds.” Ordinarily, he adds, such “miraculous

signs from God” are not properly heeded!

The birth of a deformed calf at Freiberg (Saxony) towards the
close of 1522 was regarded by Luther as a miracle wrought by God in

%0 Amsdorf offers his assistance in procuring husbands for them; thus he
offers the sister
of Staupitz to Spalatin, adding: “But if you wish for a younger
one, you shall have your
choice of the prettiest.” (Grisar, Luther, Vol II, p. 137.)
21 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, pp. 86 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIX,
pp. 102 sqq. (year 1524.)
22 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 111, pp. 159 sq.

AUXILIARIES FROM THE MONASTERIES

235

condemnation of the monastic life.?® He found that this monstrosity
really represented a cowled monk in the act of preaching—an evident
symbol of the divine wrath against the religious state. He published
his discovery in a treatise entitled, “Interpretation etc. of the MonkCalf of Freiberg.” ?* The work was composed in a quasi-mystical
style. The age was very superstitious about monstrosities, but Luther’s
pamphlet was unprecedented. In view of this literary product, one
would like to wish, in the name of German literature, that the interpretation had been intended to be facetious. In reality an attempt
has been made on the part of Protestants to explain the pamphlet
as a huge joke. But a careful perusal of it completely destroys this
hypothesis. The work on the monstrosity of Freiberg is itself a
monstrosity. A terrible seriousness breathes from these prophetical,
hyper-spiritualistic pages. The author quotes Sacred Scripture to
show that his interpretation is “adequately founded” on the word

of God. He intimates that perhaps the portent signalizes the day
of judgment, “since many portents have succeeded one another of
late.” In exhibiting to his readers a distorted illustration of the deformed calf, he hypercritically undertakes to apply the details of
this miraculous phenomenon to monasticism. The supposed cowl
represents the worship which the monks render to the calf, i. e., “the
false idol in their lying hearts.” The cowl over the hind-quarters

is torn, this signifies the impurity of the monks; the legs are their
“impudent doctors”; the monster is blind because they are blind;
its ears are grotesque because of the abuse of the confessional; the
tightening of the cowl around the neck signifies their obstinacy;
the crippled horns indicate God’s intention of breaking the power

of monasticism; above all, the attitude of the calf is that of a
preacher, which means that the preaching of the monks is despicable
in the eyes of God.

Melanchthon prefaces the story of Luther’s “Monk-Calf” by another treatise, namely, his own interpretation of the “Pope-Ass of
Rome,” a semi-legendary freak supposed to have been discovered in
the Tiber in 1496.25 The learned humanist was even more absorbed
in the mystical world of such portents, than Luther. The latter
23 Relative to the following, cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 149 sqq., and Lutherstudien,

V (Kampfbilder, n. 1II), pp. 14sqq., with two illustrations.

24 Printed with Melanchthon’s dissertation on the “pope-ass” in the Weimar ed. of
Luther’s writings, Vol. XI, pp. 369 5qq.; in the Erlangen ed., Vol. XXIX, pp. 7 sqq.

25 Grisar, Lutherstudien, n. V. (Kempfbilder, n. III), pp. 1 sqq., with two illustrations.

236

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

subsequently approved of and praised the first part of their joint
production, in his “Amen to the Interpretation of the Pope-Ass.”

“The sublime divine Wisdom itself,” he said, “‘created this hideous, shocking, and horrible image.” . . . “Well may the whole world be affrighted and
tremble.” “God manifests Himself openly in this abomination; great indeed
is the wrath impending over the papacy.”

“The multitude of signs,” which Luther beheld and interpreted, presaged
“something greater than reason can imagine,” to quote the words of his
Kirchenpostille.?®

Both works, that on the “Monk-Calf” and that on the “Pope-Ass,”
enjoyed the widest circulation, both jointly and separately, in repeated German editions and in translations into foreign languages.
The illustrations were circulated as leaflets in order to gain adherents
to the Lutheran cause. The “Pope-Ass” constituted a permanent
fixture in Luther’s polemical vocabulary. As late as 1545, the picture
was selected by him for inclusion in his collection of “Illustrations
of the Papacy.”

The lively conviction with which Luther treated similar portents, in
which “God openly manifests Himself,” constitutes in some measure
an excuse for his conduct. The manner in which he labored to
promote opposition to the Church after his return from the Wartburg,
reveals a misguided combative spirit, inspired by design, acrimony,
hatred, and other reprehensible motives. At the same time, the great

power of his own prejudices must always be taken into consideration.
His excited state of mind did not permit him to measure his steps
with sufficient clearness. His eschatological notions, as revealed by
his writings on the monsters just mentioned, limited his intellectual

outlook.??
We must always remember that the historical portrait of Luther
is not devoid of favorable traits, even at the time of his severest
polemical strain after his sojourn at the Wartburg. There is, in the
first place, his external manner of life. He is remarkably unconcerned
about his dangerous status of one declared an outlaw by the empire

and is satisfied with the very modest circumstances in his decaying
monastery, which was hardly able to provide him with food and
28 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 150.
27 Ibid., Vol. 1II, pp. 153 sqq.; Vol. V, pp. 241sqq.; Vol. VI, PP. 141 sqq.

THE MOVEMENT WITHIN THE EMPIRE

237

lodging. He is always ready to advise his friends, even though he is
overwhelmed with letters. He attracts students to himself by his
winsome and unassuming ways. In his sermons he preaches a sound
morality, often with forceful emphasis and great ardor, always with
marvelous clearness, plastic metaphors, and directness of speech.
Abandoning the field of controversy for that of practical religion, he
publishes popular works, such as his prayer-book, which, as he says,
was intended to “propose a simple Christian form and mirror,”
to help the faithful to “recognize sins and to pray.” 28 This is true
of many other printed sermons on Biblical subjects, on the commandments, on faith, on the Our Father and the Hail Mary.?® Even more
important was the continued labor devoted to his translation of the
Old Testament, of which portions appeared from time to time.
Did he still remain a monk in his exterior appearance? Dantiscus
reports that Luther, when he visited him in 1523, no longer wore
the Augustinian habit at home. He wore it when he preached, however,
until October, 1524, when it was quite threadbare, and then exchanged it for a civilian coat, the cloth for which was presented to
him by the Elector.
3.

THE

MOVEMENT WITHIN THE EMPIRE

After his return to Wittenberg, Luther, as we have seen, labored
almost as zealously in behalf of his new religion, as if no measures

had been taken against him at Worms. Notwithstanding the imperial
ban, his activities were but little restricted. There had been no effective prohibition of his books, no determined prevention of the

sending of preachers and the seizure of parishes, no lack of freedom

for his personal movements, at least not within the confines of

electoral Saxony. What particularly aided his cause was the fact
that the Emperor’s attention had been almost completely diverted
from Germany immediately after the diet of Worms. The long war
with Francis I of France occupied all of his time. Henceforth, the
forces prepared to offer resistance to Luther—and of these the rulers
of the empire had an adequate number at their command—Ilacked

a rallying point and competent leaders. The so-called “imperial
28 Ksstlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 574.

29 Kawerau, Luthers Schriften, n. 178, 216, 242, 265, and Kirchenpostille, n. 137, 163.

238

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

regimen” at Nuremberg was a cumbersome body and with its constant need of funds not adapted to evolve a uniform and effective
policy against a prince.of the reputation and political acumen of
Frederick of Saxony, the protector of Luther, and against the impetuous methods of the theological tribune of Wittenberg, who had
succeeded in arousing the masses. The mandatory formulas of the
edict of Worms, with their medieval apparatus, may have seemed
promising in the eyes of the young emperor, who was zealous in
promoting the interests of the Church, and in those of the papal
nuncio, Aleander. In reality, however, they had lost much of their
former force in view of the changed conditions of the time.

The head of the imperial regimen at Nuremberg was the Emperor’s
brother, Ferdinand, a sincere Catholic, who acted as viceroy for the
empire and was ably assisted in the affairs that pertained to the support of the ancient religion by the courageous Duke George of
Saxony. Among the foreign ambassadors accredited to the government the Saxon councilor, John von Planitz, labored energetically
and successfully to promote the pro-Lutheran and dilatory policy
of his master, Frederick of Saxony. The severe measures which
the government had originally adopted to enforce the edict of
Worms, found no response, not even in Nuremberg itself. The opposing elements succeeded in protecting themselves by indicating the
danger of a revolt on the part of the agitated masses. Above all
they pointed out that the theological questions at issue had not as
yet been definitively decided. The complaints of the Catholic members of the government against the oppressive financial measures
of Rome likewise constituted an obstacle to decisive action.
During this dangerous state of suspense, Pope Leo X passed away,

on December 1, 1521. His successor, the pious and scholarly Adrian
VI, who had labored in opposition to the ecclesiastical revolution as
a professor at Louvain and as cardinal-archbishop of Tortosa, con-

ceived the noble plan of mastering the hostile movement in Germany
by means of a thorough reform within the Church, and by openly

acknowledging that the curia and the clergy had a share in the guilt.
He sent Chieregati as nuncio to the imperial diet which assembled at

Nuremberg in the fall of 1522, and commissioned him to deliver

a celebrated address on the necessity of a reform of Rome and the
entire hierarchy and clergy, which has become a unique document of
his unselfish, profound, honest, and candid character. In the strained

THE MOVEMENT WITHIN THE EMPIRE

239

relations of the time, however, it failed to produce any results.?® The
efforts which he made during his short pontificate of twenty months
towards ameliorating conditions in Rome were destined to fail in a
great measure, due to the opposition of worldly-minded priests and
prelates. It required time to achieve the necessary reforms. This highminded pope, the last of German race, saw his fondest hopes shattered
and was carried off all too prematurely by death.
Chieregati’s demand that the edict of Worms be executed, was

turned down by the imperial diet for the reason that it might provoke civil war. In lieu thereof, the estates demanded a church council,
which was to be convoked within one year on German soil, for the
purpose of allaying the current controversies. In the meantime the
Gospel was to be preached “in conformity with the right Christian
understanding.” Luther could content himself with this resolution.
Under somewhat more favorable auspices, a new diet was opened
at Nuremberg in January, 1524.
The new pope, Clement VII (1523-1534), who, as Cardinal Julius

de’ Medici, had led an irreproachable life, made every possible effort
to suppress the religious innovations by enforcing the decrees of
Worms. As a result of the activities of his excellent nuncio, Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggio, the majority of the delegates at the diet
acknowledged the legality of the edict of Worms and declared their
willingness to enforce it “as far as possible.” A minority, consisting
mainly of representatives of the cities, in which the reform move-

ment was stronger, declared that the execution of the edict of
Worms was simply impossible and repeated the misguided demand
for a “free ecumenical council,” to be held in Germany. This was
accompanied by the still more misleading demand, in the form of a

resolution adopted by the assembly, for the convocation of a national
synod at Spires in the autumn, which was temporarily to restore
order. Campeggio at once declared the latter resolution to be the
beginning of an “eternal schism.” The Pope repudiated it most
energetically, and the Emperor in forceful language prohibited the
undertaking and demanded the enforcement of the edict.

30 Pastor, Geschichte der Pipste, Vol. IV, Part 2, pp. 89sqq. In his address, Chieregati
read his instructions, which, according to Pastor, are “a document unique in the history
of the papacy.” “We frecly confess,” the document states, “that God permits this persecu-~

tion of His Church because of the sins of men, particularly those of the priests and prelates. . . . All these evils have perhaps originated with the Roman curia,” etc. (Pastor,

p- 93)-

240

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

Luther now resumed the fight against the edict of Worms. He
reprinted it with a furious commentary, bearing the title: “Two
Discordant Imperial Commandments concerning Luther.” 3! He confronted it with the resolution of the diet of Nuremberg in 1524. In
it he incites the Germans by appealing to them to consider how, after
all, they were “compelled to be the asses and martyrs of the pope,
even if they had to be pulverized in a mortar.”” In heroic words he
tells the princes of his willingness to die: “What, is not Luther’s
life so highly esteemed before God, that, if he died, not one of you
would be certain of your life or rule, and his death would be a
misfortune for you all? There is no jesting with God.” So certain
was he of his spiritual mission.
At the instigation of Campeggio, the Catholic princes now adopted
practical measures by forming a defensive alliance against Luther
and his passionate threats of a revolution, which, in his opinion, could
be stemmed by him alone. The idea of an alliance was in the air.

Towards the end of June, 1524, Ferdinand with the Bavarian dukes
and most of the bishops of Southern Germany founded at Ratisbon
a union for the protection of the Catholic religion, the extermination
of heresy, and the solidification of the Empire. It was a necessity
forced upon them: by the dimensions which the religious revolt had

assumed and by the dangers which threatened the State. The destruc-

tion of German unity was not begun at this time, as Protestant his-

torians maintain; rather, the subsequent decline of unity was caused

by the division that had preceded this union and by the religious
schism which was accomplished by political measures. The Emperor
welcomed the alliance of Ratisbon. It was welcomed still more cordially by Pope Clement because of the hopes it engendered of restraining the religious defection. For the time being, however, the Pope’s
efforts to extend the alliance of the princes into Northern German
y
proved futile.
Among those who inspired the least hope of
energetic resistance
to the innovation, was the archbishop and elector
of Mayence,
Albrecht of Brandenburg. This man, who adhered
to a frivolous
philosophy of life and was known for his loose morals,
maintained
distinguished Lutherans such as Wolfgang Capito at his court.
Luther, who knew that he could depend on him, dared
to write to
81 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, p. 254. Erl. ed., Vol.
XXIV, 2nd ed., p. 220.

THE MOVEMENT WITHIN THE EMPIRE

241

the Archbishop on December 1, 1521, saying that he must not molest
the priests who had married and abolish the practice of indulgences
in the city of Halle; he added that he expected a reply within
fourteen days, and if it were not forthcoming, he would publish
his work “Against the Idol of Halle,” which he had completed, but
never printed.3? After three weeks, on December 31, Luther received
a reply in which the Archbishop addresses him as “Dear Doctor”

and states that he had received his letter graciously, that the indulgence at Halle had been discontinued, that he intended to be
“a pious, religious and Christian ruler,” and, finally, that he purposed “to be favorable and friendly” towards Luther “for the sake

of Christ.”” 33 Luther now waxed more hopeful. But since he was
disappointed in his principal expectation, namely, that the Arch-

bishop would marry and convert his spiritual fief into a secular

state, he launched a personal attack upon him, in a letter dated June
2, 1525. He positively demanded that the Archbishop “enter the state
of matrimony and transform his bishopric into a secular princi-

pality.” He also stated that the spiritual order was doomed to destruction beyond recovery, and if God did not perform a miracle,
it is “terrible if 2 man were to die without a wife,” since God had
created him a male. At that time he was about to marry Catherine

Bora. Shortly afterwards this letter to Albrecht was printed for the
benefit of other spiritual princes of the Empire.** A kind fate pre-

served Albrecht from adopting the proposal of Luther, who directed
new outbursts of ill-will against the Archbishop on several later
occasions.

In the letter which Luther wrote to Albrecht of Brandenburg,
he referred to the general degradation of the clergy manifested by

“various songs, sayings, satires,” and by the fact that priests and
monks were cartooned on walls, placards, and lastly on playing
cards. This systematic defamation was common particularly in electoral Saxony, during the reign of Frederick, the protector of the

“Reformation,” who knowingly permitted the attacks upon Catholi
and
ion
decept
The
life.
of
cism to increase in every department
duplicity which he practiced casts a dark shadow upon his character
and places his customary surname, “the Wise,” in a peculiar light.
82 Erl. ed., Vol. LI, p. 95 (Briefwechsel, 11, p. 251).

38 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 265.

8¢ Erl. ed., Vol. LIII, p. 308 (Briefwechsel, V, p. 186).

242

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

Up to his death, on May 5, 1525, Frederick practiced double-

dealing in religious matters. He never married, but had two sons and
a daughter by a certain Anna Weller. He and Albrecht of Mayence
were the two most esteemed and powerful German princes of the
time, the one a spiritual primate, the other a prince in the temporal

order, but neither of them distinguished by high moral qualities.
A few words must be added concerning the attitude of the Saxon
Elector towards Catholicism in Wittenberg.
The support which Frederick gave to the religious innovation
produced deterrent phenomena, particularly in the stormy fight
which Luther waged against the remnants of the Mass at Wittenberg.
Notwithstanding his former declaration of tolerance toward the
“weak” and his statement regarding the avoidance of force, Luther’s
intervention against the celebration of the Mass on the part of the
last Catholic priest at the electoral chapel and the monastery church
became a tragedy of flagrant intolerance.?® Already in 1522, the
Elector, yielding to the pressure of Luther, abolished the customary
solemn exposition of relics. On March 1, 1523, Luther invited the
chapter to put an end once and for all to the celebration of the
Mass, otherwise the capitularies would have to be disfellowshipped
from the communion of the Church. In a second letter he seriously
threatened to discontinue his prayers for them, which might cause
unpleasant consequences before God! A romantic self-deception regarding his influence in Heaven! When the Elector still hesitated to
give his consent and warned against disturbances, Luther appealed
to the people in a sermon in which he advised them not to lay violent
hands on the canons, and stated that the territorial lord had “no
authority except in secular matters.” A new, sharp letter of Luther
to the cathedral canons provoked the censure of the Elector; but
Luther knew he could go farther; he felt assured of the final approval of Frederick, and nothing in that letter was more correct

than the warning issued to his enemies, that they were not certain
of the protection of the Elector. A new sermon in which Luther
fulminated against the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, was delivered on

November 27, 1524. The princes and the authorities, he exclaimed,

ought finally to force “the blasphemous servants of the Babylonian
harlot” to stop the devilish practice of saying Mass. It was scarcely
35 For the following cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1I, PP- 885qq., and
especially pp. 327 sqq.;
Vol. IV, pp. 506 sqq.

THE MOVEMENT WITHIN THE EMPIRE

243

possible to restrain the people and the students from committing

acts of violence. The town-council and the university threatened
with the wrath of God the priests who still held out. Finally,

Frederick “the Wise” abandoned them ignominiously to their fate.
A vigorous word from him, reinforced by his guard, would have
silenced the opponents, at least in the city.

The canons finally bowed to the raging elements. On Christmas,

1524, Mass was suspended for the first time, never to be resumed.
Referring to the three remaining Catholic canons, Luther, in his
characteristic fashion, said that “three swine and bellies” still re-

mained in the church, “not of All Saints, but of all devils.”
An echo of his violent sermons against the Sacrifice of the Mass

was the tract, “On the Abomination of the Silent Mass, called the
Canon,” which he published in the beginning of the year 1525.%°
In it he attributes the merit for the deeds of violence perpetrated at
Wittenberg to the “secular lords,” who, he says, had been obliged
to intervene.

In a letter written at the beginning of May, 1525, to the Elector
Frederick, who was very ill at the time, Luther’s friend Spalatin,
Frederick’s counselor and guide in the above-described fight on
the Mass, unreservedly set forth the duties of secular rulers to

promote a religious reformation.®” This applied to all territorial rulers.
A few days later, on May s, Frederick died in his castle at Lochau
after receiving the Last Supper under both forms, as an adherent of
Luther; he was the first German prince thus to pass away. Luther
had been summoned to attend him in his last moments, but arrived
too late. In fact, he had never met Frederick personally. On the

,
tenth of May, and again on the eleventh, the day of the funeral
ded
aboun
he delivered funeral orations in the castle- hurch, which
In a
tor.
protec
nt
prude
and
ly
friend
his
of
es
eulogi
in exuberant
ed,
the deceas who
consolatory letter addressed to John, the brother of intima
relations.
succeeded him as ruler, he renewed his former, very thanteFreder
ick,
John proved an even more determined protector e Catholic worand with his assistance Luther was able to exterminat
ship in the electorate of Saxony.

As the Reformation was imposed in electoral Saxony by pressure

; Grisar,
88 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 22sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIX, pp. 1133qq.
:

Luther, Vol. IV, pp. so8 sqq.

87 K¢stlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 724.

244

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

from above, so, too, in other German territories. The free imperial
cities especially hastened to take the lead in the introduction of the
new ecclesiastical régime by recourse to penal measures ‘enforced

by the civil authorities.
The tremendous development of the civil power at that time was

very advantageous to the extension of the Protestant revolt. A
number of practically independent principalities arose from the loose
structure of the empire. Due to the long absence of the Emperor,
the territorial rulers found themselves thrown upon their own re-

sources. The increase of power which accrued to their scepters in

virtue of the new religious system, accelerated their steps in the

direction of absolutism.
As early as 1523, Luther had dedicated his treatise “On Secular
Authority and the Extent of the Obedience due to it” to John, the
heir-apparent to the throne of the Saxon Electorate.?® It was a

sermon which he had delivered in John’s presence at Weimar and
which was published at the latter’s request, after having been enlarged by the author. Luther later on loved to appeal to this work,
in order to show that it was he who had indicated the proper measures
to the civil governments for emerging from the oppression of the

papacy. “I would fain boast,” he says of himself, “that, since the age
of the Apostles, the secular sword and authority have never been
described so clearly or praised so splendidly, as by me, as even my antagonists must acknowledge.” *® However, what good there is in this
work had long ago been expounded by Catholic writers, e. g.,
the
demonstration from Holy Writ that the secular power exercises
its
authority by the will and ordinance of God. Luther’s exhortat
ions to
the princes in the third part are beautiful, but by no means
new.
On the other hand, the new ideas contained in the second
part of
the treatise on the restriction of the civil power to tempor
al affairs,
and to the punishment of evil-doers and the protect
ion of good
citizens were fallacious and contradicted the
theories concerning
the assistance to be furnished by temporal rulers
for ecclesiastical

purposes which he himself subsequently

enunciated and openly ap-

plied. In the second part of the treatise he has

in mind only Catholic

princes, his intention being to oppose
a strong barrier to their
:: Vlein.xar ed., Vol. XI, pp. 245 sqq.; Erl.
ed., Vol. XXII, pp. 59 sqq.

i

s

Késtlin-Kawerau, M. Lutber, Vol.

331.

I, p. 584. Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol.
II, pp. 294 3qq.;

THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH

245

measures against Lutheranism and for the protection of the Catholic
religion. Hence the assertion that secular princes have no voice in
matters pertaining to religion. Hence, also, the separation in principle

of the kingdom of God from the kingdom of the world, which he
proposes. The world, he says, is a house of devils which requires
the sword for its government. But the true Christian believer lives
‘in a divine kingdom, which needs no laws and no compulsion, but is
governed solely by the Word of God. These are hazy and extravagant
ideas which led him to make such declarations as the following:
a Christian must put up with any injustice committed against him
by his fellowmen, and leave it to the authorities to protect him;

for Christ in the Sermon on the Mount taught men to resist evil.
In general, the Sermon on the Mount, with its passages referring to

the blow on the cheek, etc., affords, to the mind of Luther, not
only a guide to perfection; it supplies no mere “evangelical counsels,”
as the papists teach, but real commandments, which are known to
and observed only by those who dwell in the kingdom of Christ,

but not by those who inhabit the kingdom of the world and by the
civil authorities.*® Here he meets with a dilemma when he invests
the prince with a dual personality which, on the one hand, funda-

mentally degrades him to the rank of a beadle and a “jailer” of the
wicked, whilst, on the other, he must satisfy the most exaggerated
religious demands as a Christian believer.

At that time Luther never imagined that he would soon be compelled to regard the civil rulers as the real protectors and guardians
of religion in their respective territories, whose chief duty was to
ward off the “wolves,” i.e., the “papistical” antagonists of the
Reformation, and to eradicate the “sacrilegious” Mass.
4. THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH

At the beginning of his revolt Luther entertained certain pseudomystical ideas of a freely operating system of congregations.*' He
soon found it to be impossible to form an organization of those
members of former parishes who had been aroused by the new
Evangel—an organization which would be purely spiritual and reject
40 Grisar, Luther, Vol. TI, pp. 298sq. On Luther’s distinction between the world and

the Church see ibid., Vol. V, pp. 55 sqq.

41 For the following, see ibid., Vol. II, pp. 102 sqq.

246

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

coercive measures, whether secular or ecclesiastical. Thus he was
necessarily compelled to change his ideal from that of a congregational church to that of a popular church ruled by a spiritual
authority under the protection of the State. Thence, by the intrinsic
necessity of his new system, he arrived at the compulsory national
Church and his original idea of an invisible Church became gradually obliterated.
'
Yet he always wished to have a separate church for those who
truly believed in his Gospel, as distinct from a church which was
open to all, even to those who thought in terms of paganism. Repeatedly he voices his longing for such a genuinely Christian church
(ecclesiola) with a superintendent, ecclesiastical discipline, and the

ban, subject, not to the State, but to himself. He admits, however,
that he has not a sufficient number of people to join him in this
project.*? Undoubtedl
the
y execution of this plan would have resulted in two ambitious and mutually antagonistic groups of
churches. In general, it is evident how instability and disintegration
were the sole fruits of Luther’s abandonment of the true concept
of the Church. Some modern Protestant writers hold that Luther
did not establish any church whatever. The separation of the State
from the German Protestant ecclesiastical structure, which has taken
place in our time, and the disappearance of the supreme episcopate
of the Protestant State ruler, has placed this statement in a new
light. There is need of reconstructing the church from the foundation up.

It is interesting to review the intended institution and ultimate

fate of the congregational church originally planned by Luther.
It was to be a free covenant of brethren without binding

laws. Those who

had embraced the Gospel of Luther were to remain,
without compulsion,
under supreme representatives of a corporate body of
their own selection,
and to call themselves Christians (not Lutherans). They
were to have their
own Last Supper and their own dogmas. The
free covenant was to be an

organization for service only, with “unity .of spirit,”
as Luther himself
repeatedly says, and not unity “of place, persons,
things or bodies.” ¢ He

does not desire a sectarian body. “To create sects,”
he says, ““is neither useful
nor helpful.” In his opinion, it was, moreover, unneces
sary in order to unite
into a Christian covenant prior to the proxima
te end of the world, the still
42 See ibid., Vol. V, pp. 133 $qq.
48 1bid., Vol. 11, pp. 107 sq.

THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH

247

faithful members of the papal empire of Antichrist—the pious who were
“terrified in conscience.”

How is the representative of the brotherhood to be selected? Luther
writes: ““Those whose hearts have been moved by God” should band together

and choose a “bishop,” i. e., “a minister or pastor.” Even though the congregation number only six or ten persons, they will attract others, “who
have not yet received the Word.” “They must not act of their own accord,
but must allow themselves to be moved by God.” “It is quite certain that
Christ acts through them.” *¢

The first coherent statement of these ideas is to be found in a Latin
treatise of 1523, which Luther addressed to the Utraquists or Calixtines of
Prague. He entertained vain hopes of winning over this party, which still

obeyed the Catholic hierarchy. His instructions to them were also intended
for Germany, and above all for Saxony. This explains why he had the Latin
treatise published also in German.*®

About this time he purposed to establish 2 model congregation of free
Christians constituted from among the masses, in Leisnig, a small town situ-

ated in the Saxon electorate.*® He addressed a treatise to the adherents of
the new Evangel in that town, the title of which is characteristic of the
impracticability of his ideal. The tract was entitled: “Reasons and Scriptural
Motives Demonstrating that a Christian Assembly or Congregation has the

Right and the Power to pass on all Dogmas and to Summon, Install, and
Depose Teachers.” ** The document states that, according to the Scriptures,
the universal priesthood of all Christian believers empowers every member
of the congregation to exercise independent judgment in matters of faith.

Every member may come forward and correct the erring preacher. St. Paul
says: “If anything be revealed to another sitting, let the first hold his
peace” (I Cor. XIV, 30, where he speaks of the charismata of the firstis
Christians). A Christian congregation is one in which the pure Gospel
which
preached. It is presupposed, however, that this is the new Evangel
speak
who
accord
in
are
all
which
with
and
light
to
t
brough
has
Luther
papists,
The
”
heaven.
from
the truth, since this doctrine ‘‘has been received

so Luther writes to the inhabitants of Leisnig, “ought to yield to us and to
hear our Word.”

ne expecEvents at Leisnig, as everywhere else, failed to justify his sangui
ion. When,

ve dissens
tations. There was doctrinal confusion and administrati
an introduction to
issued
r
in 1523, in his solicitude for this town, Luthe
came to naught.*®
e
measur
cent
their new “fiscal regulations,” this benefi
44 1bid., p. 111.
45 1bid., p. 112.

46 Ibid., Vol. V, pp. 136sqq.

pp. 1405q9.
47 Weimar ed., Vol. XI, pp. 408 saq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXII,
105,
p.
XXII,
Vol.
ed,
Erl.
11;
p.
XII,
Vol.
ed.,
48 Weimar

248

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

The town-council confiscated the properties and endowments of the church,
but refused to co-operate in the establishment of a common poor-box.

Luther’s appeal to the Elector for aid was futile. Nothing more is reported
concerning the development of the religious life of the congregation in the
town of Leisnig.

The fate of this ideal congregation was a great disappointment to
Luther. But, as a Protestant investigator writes, “The primitive
Lutheran ideal of a congregation forming itself in entire independence

was nowhere realized. . . . Thus at an early date Lutheranism took
its place among the political factors, and its development was to a

certain extent dependent upon the tendencies and inclinations of the

authorities, particularly of the ruling sovereigns of that time.” 4°
$. DIVINE SERVICE. MULTIFARIOUS ACTIVITIES

In 1523 Luther issued his treatise “On the Order of Divine Service
in the Congregation,” published in the interest of Leisnig and other
expected churches of true believers. It was a provisional collection
of counsels—not precepts, as he himself emphasizes—for the conduct of divine service.5° The Word and the arousing of “faith” are,
in his mind, the principal thing in public worship. He would have
each congregation regulate these matters by its own authority after
the model of the worship practiced in “the Apostolic age.” There

were to be daily assemblies, if not of the entire population, then at
least of the clergymen and scholars, for the purpose of praying and
reading the Bible.
Regarding the Mass, which was to be celebrated on Sunday
in
connection with the Last Supper, Luther, in 1523, issued a small

Latin treatise entitled “Formula of the Mass and Commun
ion for

the Church in Wittenberg.”
5 According to this formula, the socalled Mass is not yet to be celebrated in German. The
sequence
of parts corresponds rather closely to the Catholic
Latin Mass, Even
the alb and the chasuble were to be worn by the celebra
nt in the
Lutheran church of Wittenberg.
The Mass commenced with the Introit, Kyrie, Gloria,
and an oration,
followed by the Epistle with a chanted Graduale or
Alleluja, and the Gospel.

49 Walter Fried.ensburg, Cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 333.

50 Weimar ed., Vol. XII, pp. 35 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol.
XXII, p. 159.
51 Weimar ed., Vol. XIil, pp. 205 $aq.; Opp. Lat.
Var., VII, pp. 1 sqq.

MULTIFARIOUS ACTIVITIES

249

Relative to the traditional pericopes, Luther complained that they did not
sufficiently inculcate the saving faith. The sermon was soon given the place
of honor in the middle of the function, namely, after the Credo. In accordance with the “Formula,” there was an abrupt transition to the Preface: for,
since the sacrificial character of the Mass had been denied, the Offertory and
the prayers that followed it were omitted. The ancient Canon was omitted,
so that the Preface was immediately succeeded by the celebrant’s chanting
of the Biblical words of the institution of the Holy Eucharist (1 Cor. XI,
23—25). This chant was supposed to signify the consecration of the bread
and wine for the Last Supper. Then followed the Sanctus and the Benedictus,

the latter united with the Elevation. “For the sake of those weak in the
faith,” the Elevation was retained in the church at Wittenberg. The Pater

Noster and the Pax Domini were succeeded by the communion of the celebrant, followed by the communion, under both species, of those among the
faithful who had announced their intention of receiving, provided that such
were present, and that they had stood the test of knowledge and worthiness
which was demanded by Luther not long afterwards. The close of the Mass

consisted of 2 selection of Catholic prayers after the Communion, the
Benedicamus, and a benediction couched in a Biblical phrase.

'The Mass, as thus described, was the first transition to the forms
of worship still customary in the Lutheran churches. In course of
time it was simplified and toned down even more, and, in view of
Luther’s constant emphasis on freedom, exhibited many local variations. As early as 1523 he had given it a German setting, which superseded the Latin language, through his work, “The German Mass and
Order of Divine Service.” 52

Already at an early stage complaints had been heard that divine
service had become barren and ordinary, in consequence of the preponderance of the sermon, which often developed into a tedious

polemical tirade against papism. The Catholic forms of worship,
per se richer and more varied than Luther’s borrowings from the
ancient liturgy, were animated by the idea of the Eucharistic sacri-

fice. In the minds of Catholics the entire function was dominated
by the idea of a sacrifice of infinite worth, offered by the Son of
God through the consecrated hands of the priest—a sacrifice of

which the most ancient ecclesiastical writers, such as Justin, Ignatius
of Antioch, Clement of Rome, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Irenaeus,
of which the Protesspeak with great reverence, professing the faith
52 Weimar ed., Vol. XIX, pp. 72 sqq. Erl. ed., Vol. XXII, pp. 226 sqq.

250

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

tant theologian, Martin Chemnitz, admits that Christian antiquity
“constantly expresses it with such nouns as sacrificium, immolatio,
oblatio, hostia, victima, and such verbs as offerre, sacrificare, immolare.” ®® In the divine service devised by Luther, the heart which
had formerly pulsated through the divine cult was missing; the

whole thing had become a corpse, which even the popular religious
hymns soon introduced, impressive though they were, failed to inspire
with life.
'
Beginning with 1523, Luther devoted himself to the composition

of liturgical and other hymns. 5¢ In this field he was very successful.
His compositions are models of popularity and unadorned, natural

force. They served to edify the people and became a mighty lever
in the spread of Lutheranism. The aggressive mood is strongly

marked in some of these hymns, as may be seen from the opening
words of: “Behalt uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort, Und steur des Papst’s

und Tiirken Mord, Die Jesum, Deinen lieben Sohn, Stiirmen wollen

von Deinem Thron” (O keep us, Lord, true to Thy Word, stay the
murders of the Pope and the Turks, who would assail Thy beloved

Son Jesus Christ and cast Him from Thy throne). This song was
written for the children, by whom “it was to be sung against the

arch-enemies of Christ and His holy Church, the Pope and the
Turks.” %5 Luther’s first poetical and political song was “Ein neues
Lied wir heben an,” commemorating the execution of two Dutch
Lutherans at Brussels.
Luther supplied his followers with an ample collection of beautiful hymns, mostly adapted from the ancient Church, and highly

esteemed many of the religious folk-songs of the German people,
which embodied precious reminiscences of his youth. He is not, as
used to be affirmed, the father of the German religious or ecclesiastical folk-song, since German songs had resounded both within
and without the Church long before his day. Owing to his
efforts,
however, they flourished among his followers and in their churches
became part of the-divine service in lieu of the liturgical hymns
of the ancient Church.5® The first hymn-book intende
d for the

use of the Lutheran churches was supplied by Johann
Walther in
53 Examen Concilii Tridentini, Vol. II, p. 782.
54 Edited by Lucke in Vol. LIII of the Weimar edition

of Luthers Werke.
55 Grisar, Lutherstudien, Heft IV (Luthers Trutzlied
), p. 47.
86 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 546 sqq.

MULTIFARIOUS ACTIVITIES

251

1524. It was entitled “Geistliches Gesangbiichlein” (Spiritual Hymn-

book), and contained in five parts German hymns with appropriate

melodies. Luther wrote the preface and the collection went out
under his name. It comprised twenty-four hymns composed by himself and was subsequently augmented by twelve others from his pen.

The hymn of defiance: “Ein’ feste Burg” (A safe stronghold our God
is still), which is regarded as the best of his poetical productions,
was composed later, in 1527—28, during a strenuous period of interior
and exterior stress. °7

Johann Walther supplied the melodies, which evidenced skill and

good taste. They conformed, in part, to the traditions of Catholicism.

It is not certain that Luther is the author of even a single melody,
although up to the present time Protestant writers persist in glorifying him as a musical composer. A report concerning his alleged compositions made by a visitor at Wittenberg, who claims to have been a
contemporary, is a late fabrication, both in this respect as well as in

respect of the charge that Luther was a constant visitor at the
tavern. 98

Among the manifold writings which Luther’s industry produced in
the years that have been reviewed so far, there is one which is en-

titled, “A Christian Admonition concerning Exterior Divine Wor-

ship,”®® directed to his followers in Livonia. It illustrates the confusion in divine service which necessarily resulted from the religious
changes and the liberty granted by Luther. The Lutheran congrega- tions in Livonia were engaged in serious quarrels. In vain the voice
of Wittenberg appealed to them: “Be united in regard to these exterior characteristics.” Luther admonishes them against the introduction of a coercive discipline, which, he fears, would only lead to worse

dissensions. ““Who can resist the devil and his satellites?”” “Where the
divine Word penetrates, Satan must scatter his seeds out of sheer
envy.” 80

Naturally there was great discord and perplexity also in other

places, not only in liturgical, but likewise in far more important
matters.

57 1bid., Vol. V, pp. 342 sqq.

58 Grisar, Ein unterschobener Bericht iiber Luther als Tonsetzer und Stammgast, in the
pp.

Ebrengabe an Prinz Jobann Georg wvon Sachsen, ed. by F. Fessler, Freiburg, 1920,
693 sqq.
59 Werke, Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 414 5993 Erlangen ed., Vol. LIII, p. 315.
60 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 151 sq.

252

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

At Strasburg there was a profound schism, as is testified, among
other things, by Luther’s “Epistle to the Christians of Strasburg
against the Spirit of Fanaticism,” printed in 1524.%' Karlstadt, whose
relations with Luther were strained because of his arbitrary ways,
had been banished from Saxony by virtue of an electoral decree issued
at the instigation of Luther, and commenced to agitate in Strasburg
against images, mural paintings, vestments worn at Mass, and other

“pagan” practices which he discovered there. He also propagated his
denial of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist and succeeded in
surrounding himself with an active coterie of adherents. Zwingli exerted his influence upon the movement from Zurich. Capito and
Bucer, at that time teachers of theology at Strasburg, were in agree-

ment with Zwingli. Certain preachers at Strasburg wrote to Luther,
asking him what should be their attitude towards the existing quarrels.
Luther hastened to have his reply printed, since he feared that like
schisms in other places would be caused by the “fanatics.” In his mind
all were fanatics who enthusiastically opposed the alleged externality
of ceremonies, or who held independent views and were not devoted
to his teaching, especially such men as Karlstadt and the “prophets of
Zwickau,” who believed that they were inspired from on high. Above
all, he attributed a fanatical spirit to those teachers who did not ad-

vance along the same line with him relative to the doctrine of the

Last Supper.

In his letter to the preachers of Strasburg he instructs the questioners to
permit themselves to be guided, not by Karlstadt’s inconstant prophetical

notions, but solely by Christ, our Redeemer and Sanctifier, who
correct precepts and for whom he (Luther) speaks.

imparts the

In the matter of the Eucharist, Luther champions the literal
interpretation of the words of Christ, “This is my body,” and makes this remarkabl
e
confession: “Had someone told me five years ago that there
was nothing
but bread and wine in the Sacrament, he would have done me
2 great favor.
I have suffered strong temptations, and have done violence
to myself and
writhed with pain, so that I would have been glad to be
relieved, because
I clearly perceived that I could thereby have administered
a great blow to
the papacy.” He adds that the old Adam in him is even now
only too much
inclined to deny the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist
; but the words,
“This is my body,” are too plain, and Karlstadt’s buffoone
ry had confirmed
him all the more in his adhesion to this simple, literal sense.
81 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, p. 391; Erl. ed., Vol.
LIII, p. 270.

MULTIFARIOCUS ACTIVITIES

253

He was soon to become involved in a far greater controversy regarding
this question with Karlstadt, and later with Zwingli.

Ulrich Zwingli, influenced by the writings of Luther and his own

one-sidedly humanistic training, had devoted himself to “reformatory” ideas while yet a pastor at Einsiedeln. After his election as pastor of the grand minster of Zurich, towards the end of 1518, he
intensified his devotion to these ideas. He had eulogized Luther as a

beacon light of Christian theology, as the fearless hero of truth, as

the man of the future. He was, however, very jealous of his own intellectual independence as against the preacher of Wittenberg. “I

have not learned the doctrine of Christ from Luther,” he stated in
1523, “but from the Word of God. If Luther preaches Christ, he
does just what I do.” %2 After 1523, the example of the Wittenberg
priests who embraced matrimony exerted its influence also upon the

numerous adherents of Zwingli. As early as 1522, Zwingli himself
had contracted a so-called “marriage of conscience” with Anna
Reinhard, and, in April, 1524, he publicly led her to the altar in the

minster church. He later admitted that he was at daggers drawn with
his vow of celibacy in the days when he was still a Catholic priest,®®
and proclaimed the theory that the devil had introduced sacerdotal
celibacy.

The grave controversy between Luther and Zwingli on the Eucharist, to be discussed in detail in the sequel, was occasioned by
Zwingli’s letter to Matthew Alber, a preacher of Reutlingen, dated
November 16, 1524. In this letter he first developed his interpretation
of the verb “is” in the text of the institution of the Eucharist in the
sense of “‘signifies.” According to his commentary of March, 1525,
he does not even wish to raise the question of the corporal consumption of the Body of Christ. %*

In the meantime Luther published his principal attack upon Karlstadt’s doctrine of the Eucharist as well as upon those who sympa-

62 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 379 sq. Farner in Zwingliona (1918-19) abandons the
old notion of Zwingli’s self-sufficiency.—“The humanist parson, to whom the Bible is a
book on morals, arrives at a true understanding of the Gospel through the agency of
Luther in 1519, and echoes his views.” Bossert, in the Theol. Literaturzeitung, Vol. XIX,

22 and 31, quoting Zwingli’s
- 6;C)Sse.e Walter Kohler, Zwinglis Geisteswelt, Gotha, 1920,3,pp.1518.
(Zwingli’s Werke, ed. by
own confession in a letter to Henry Utinger, December

Egli et al., Vol. VII, pp. 110 5q.).

84 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 409, n. 3.

254

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

thized with Karlstadt’s ideas, in his large treatise “Against the
Heavenly Prophets, on Images and the Sacrament.” It is 2 work overflowing with indigation. 6%
He shows that his former friend and colleague is guilty of harboring “a
rebellious and murderous spirit.” Karlstadt, he says, “openly declares that
I am of no account.” “If your spirit,” thus he addresses Karlstadt and his
friends, “had been the true spirit, he would have demonstrated his office
with signs and words; but he is a murderous secret devil,” whose diabolic
nature follows from the fact that they do not know how to teach the principal subject-matter of theology, namely, how “to obtain a clear conscience
and a joyful heart at peace with God. . . . They have never experienced it.” 8

The fanatics, to whom Thomas Miinzer and Valentine Ickelsamer belonged, in their repeated literary attacks upon Luther, had marshaled
many effective arguments against him. The attitude of the so-called “Baptizers” was not as foolish in every respect as Luther represented it. Recent
Protestant writers admire their modern rationalistic ideas. Luther was so

sensitive to their many effective arguments against his arbitrary conduct
that he expressed himself as follows in his book on the “Heavenly Prophets’:
“As if we did not know that reason is the devil’s handmaid and does nothing

but blaspheme and dishonor all that God says or does.” When confronted
with logical arguments he claims they are “mere devil’s roguery.” ¢

Accordingly, he appeals to the Bible. This he does very effectively
in the principal part of the book, where he demonstrates the Real

Presence of Christ in the Eucharist against Karlstadt. He exhibits so

much ingenuity and erudition in proof of his literal understanding

of the verb “is” that even Catholic theologians may learn therefrom.

However, he stops halfway, excludes transubstantiation, and holds
that Christ is present simultaneously with the bread. If the anti‘papistical Luther shines forth in this exhibition, he bids defiance still
oftener to the fanatics, as, for instance, in the treatment of the elevation during Mass. Karlstadt denounced the adoration of the
species
during the elevation. Luther writes: “Although I too had intende
d to
abolish the Elevation; yet I will not do so now, the better to
defy and
oppose the fanatical spirit.” ® In his “Clag etlicher Briider”
(Com65 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 62 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol.
XXIX, pp. 134 sqq. Cf. Grisar,

Luther, Vol. 1II, pp. 387, 390 sq.
66 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 398.

87 Ibid., pp. 395 sq.
68 1bid., p. 394.

MULTIFARIOUS ACTIVITIES

:

255§

plaint of Several Brethren) Ickelsamer reproached him, not without
justification, with producing many anti-Catholic dogmas merely out
of spite, as he himself confesses, because the papists “had pressed him
so hard,” and not because of logical necessity or calm reasoning.
The “Complaint of Several Brethren,” originating in Karlstadt’s
circle, and composed by Ickelsamer at Rothenburg on the Tauber,
aside from many exaggerations and distortions, cast a glaring light upon
Luther’s doctrine and character. ®® This is true in an even greater

degree of Thomas Miinzer’s “Apology against the Unspiritual, Luxurious Lump of Flesh at Wittenberg,” which he composed in 1524. 7
The head of the Wittenberg school was regarded by the genuine
Anabaptists, who claimed to be spiritual, as one who had gone astray
and had been ensnared by the world and sensuality. Even if they went
too far in their personal attacks, they were successful in proving

that there was no evidence for Luther’s divine mission, and that he had
no right to condemn whatever ran counter to his opinion. They re-

fused to credit him when, with characteristic self-assertiveness, he
assured them, in his address to the preachers of Strasburg, that he had
hitherto done right and well in the main. ““Whosoever asserts the contrary,” he thought, “cannot be a good spirit.”?* They reproached
him for his arbitrary treatment of a most important matter, namely,
the interpretation of the Bible, maintaining that it was not the Bible
which governed him, but the nonsense which they designated as “Bible,
Bubble, Babble.” 72 From him they claimed to have learned to exercise

freedom in searching the Scriptures, which they said they used with
discretion. He forbade them to do so, whereas, independently of him,
“the Gospel grants freedom of belief and the right of private judgment.” “Now settle yourself comfortably in the papal chair,” Ickelsamer tells him, “for after all you want to listen to your own sing-~
ing.” 73

The eccentric character of Thomas Miinzer impelled him to advance

farthest in his fanaticism for the Anabaptist system. Since Easter, 1523,

this one-time Catholic priest ruled in Allstedt near Eisleben as preacher
of the new religion, claiming to be guided by a higher spirit. It was his
69 Jbid., Vol. III, pp. 170 sq., 302.

70 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 364 sq.; -Vol. III, p. 302; Vol. 1I, pp. 130 sq.

71 1bid., Vol. 111, p. 397.
72 bid., Vol. II, pp. 365, 370 sq.
.

"31bid., p. 377.

256

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

object to exterminate the impious by the use of force and to establish
a communistic kingdom, composed of all the good people on earth and
modeled upon the supposed ideal of the Apostolic age. His readiness to
apply violent measures was manifested by his destruction, with the aid
of an excited mob, of a shrine at Malderbach near Eisleben. The spiritual and social revolution, which it was feared he would start, was proclaimed by him in a sermon published later.
It was during this state of affairs that Luther seized his mighty pen
and in the last days of July, 1524, published his “Letter to the Rulers

of Saxony on the Spirit of Revolt.” 7 It was written against Miinzer.
He demanded of the princes that they should “suppress disorder and
prevent revolution.” At the same time he tried to justify his own new

religion in the eyes of the princes. He admits that he is “deficient in the spirit

and hears no heavenly voices” like the fanatics, but asserts that his cause
comes from God, whereas the devil speaks through Miinzer. The fanatics, he
says, attacked his conduct; they “take offense at our sickly life”; but all
depends on doctrine, even if conduct has its shortcomings. “Let them but
preach confidently and cheerfully,” they will nevertheless succumb. He places

his hopes for the true Gospel in the constancy of the Elector, and in that
of his brother and son. He refers them incidentally and alluringly to the

prospects of material gain, when, relative to former Catholic churches and

monasteries, he writes: “Let the territorial lords dispose of them as they see

In his ponderous reply to Luther’s letter to the princes, which he
entitled “An Apology” (Schutzrede), Miinzer complained that Lu-

ther “exploded with fury and hatred like a rea! tyrant.” He (Miinzer)

preached from the Bible only, but not, “please God, his own conceits.”

Luther having boasted of his courageous appearance before the diet
of Worms, and of other feats, he terms him “Doctor Liar” and “Lying

Luther.” “That you appeared before the Empire at Worms at all was
thanks to the German nobles whom you had cajoled and honeyed,
for they fully expected that by your preaching you would obtain
for them Bohemian gifts of monasteries and foundations, which you
now promise to the princes.” 7

The noisy criticism of the fanatics, who kept a sharp watch

74 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, pp. 210 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. LIII, pp.
255 sqq.
75 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 365 $qq.
"6 Ibid., Vol. 11, pp. 367 sq.

on

MULTIFARIOUS ACTIVITIES

257

their opponent, rendered Luther somewhat more cautious with regard to blemishes in his own life. Whatever I do, he says, is subjected
to investigation; I am a spectacle to the world (spectaculum mundi;
1 Cor. iv, 9). He learned to moderate his appeal to the spirit, to
the inner voice, and to personal experience, and to attach greater
value to the so-called external word, i. e., the teaching of Scripture
as he interpreted it. What gave him an advantage over the fanatics
was his practical common sense, which made him feel far superior to

them.”” He did not betray such foibles as they either in his con-

cept of God and in his ideas of suffering and affliction, or in the
establishment of ecclesiastical communions, or more particularly in his

social ideas, even though his teaching in these matters was quite confused.

However, it must be emphasized that the fanatics took their departure precisely from Luther’s so-called reform ideas. They went beyond him, partly by logically developing these ideas—a thing which
Luther did not want—and partly as a result of arbitrary distortions
and additions. At all events, the fanatics are true children of Luther;

their dreams and revolutionary projects are fruits raised in his soil.
It was a catastrophal punishment for him that he was compelled to
fight practically all his life in order to dissociate the fanatics from
his work. His rage increased with his resistance and was intensified
by jealousy. They intend to invade my field of labor and fame, he
declared in substance; they wish to wrest the leadership from me and
to appropriate what I have been unable to achieve amid bitterness and
distress. ““They exploit our victory,” he says, “and enjoy it, take wives
and abate papal laws—results which they themselves did not obtain
by fighting.” 7®

Luther was especially interested in retaining infant baptism which
the fanatical Anabaptists strove to abolish. He obstinately insisted
on the absurdity that an infant received Baptism together with the

faith, even if reason were unable to comprehend this. In 1523, he
published his *“Little Book on Baptism done into German,”’ in
which he retains the old rite according to which the infant is thrice
breathed upon and the priest pronounces the exorcism, places salt

in the infant’s mouth, touches his ear with spittle, and anoints him

77 Cf, Karl Holl, Lutber, 2nd and 3rd ed., (1923), Pp. 450 5qq. on the views of Minzer.
78 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 367 sqq.

78 Weimar ed., Vol. XII, pp. 42 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXII, pp. 157 sq.

258

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

on chest and back with sacred chrism. Thus far did his policy of
accommodation go at that time.
A movement against infant Baptism had set in in Switzerland
in 1523. It was promoted by the social undercurrent of the adherents
of the new religion and provided the Anabaptist sects in Germany
with a strong impetus. Conrad Grebel, with the aid of his followers,

denied the right of the clergy to levy tithes, demanded the execution
of the priests, tried to introduce communism and to establish “congregations of the saints” wherever the laws of God were not observed.

The semblance of rigorism and pietism was common to the Swiss
and the German Anabaptists. In reality they favored a certain eman-

cipation of the flesh and demanded that nuns be permitted to marry.

6. THE PEN AS LUTHER’S WEAPON OF CONTINUED ATTACK
Matrimony almost constantly engaged the attention of Martin
Luther after he had divested it of the dignity of a Sacrament and
Placed it on a level with ordinary civil contracts. It was imperative
to devise new regulations in order to avoid a serious decline of

morality. At the same time, in the eyes of the scrupulous, the unaccustomed liberty of Christian believers in this department of life
had to be justified.
In 1519, Luther published a sermon “On the Married State,” 8°

which he had to reédit in a revised edition, because of loud complaints against unbecoming language. He had permitted himself
to go too far in his expressions, though to some extent the transcrib

may have been to blame. The new and revised edition bore the

er

title

“Of Married Life” and was published in 1522.8! In these pages,
too,

he treats of sexual intercourse with a strange freedom of language

and in his accustomed fashion.’? He declares that well-nigh all
the
obstacles or inhibitions to marriage devised by the popes
were to

e “repudiated and condemned.” He shakes the foundat
ion of the
indissolubility of the ‘marriage bond by allowing separat
ion and remarriage in certain cases.

80 Weimar ed., Vol. II, PP- 166 sqq.; IX, pp. 213 sqq.;
Erl, ed., Vol. XVI, 2nd ed., pp.

60 sqq.

.

8'1 Weimar ed., Vol. X, p. 11, pp. 275 5qq.; Erl.
ed., Vol. XVI, 2nd ed., pp. 510 sqq.
82Cf., e. 8., the coarse expressions quoted in Grisar,
Luther, Vol. I, pp. 250 sqq.

259

LUTHER’S CONTINUED ATTACKS

This latter work contains a passage which has gained notoriety. Luther
says that if the wife refuses to render the debitum without reason, the
husband may use threatening language to this effect: “If you are unwilling,
there is another who is; if the wife is unwilling, then let the maid come.” 8%

In case the wife persists in her refusal, “the marriage is dissolved,” and the
husband may “take an Esther to himself and let Vashti go, as King Assuerus
did”’; he should let his wife “go to the devil” and, with the consent of the
authorities, contract a new marriage.

:

Because of such utterances, particularly the passage, “then let the maid

reprecome,” Duke George of Saxony addressed indignant complaints to his
s
rsialist
controve
c
Catholi
The
n.
Werther
von
h
sentative in the diet, Dietric
tion
elimina
the
at
only
not
taken
was
Offense
it.
to
advert
often
of the time
of the matrimonial tie, but naturally also at the implied permission of extra-

is unwilling,
matrimonial intercourse with the maid. The phrase, “if the wifeial
phrase in
proverb
a
been
have
y
possibl
then let the maid come,” may
outside of

intercourse
usage among the uncouth peasant class, signifying inveig
hs strongly and
always
ise
otherw
Luther
r,
howeve
wedlock. Since,
he did not
that
be
may
decisively against extra-conjugal intercourse, it
rein to his
free
gave
merely
but
intend this application of the brutal phrase,
pen when he cited the expression.

connexion with his
Luther’s work “Of Married Life,” taken in
widely he
revea
other writings and pronouncements, clearly ugallstie.how
August Bebel

n of the conj
opened the door to the destructio
marriage, he [Luther] develops
to
rd
rega
h
“Wit
justly observes:
this category belongs Luther’s
astonishingly radical views.” #* To
of St. Paul to the Corinthians”wor(I,k
work on “The Seventh Chapter
1523. In some passages this y.®
Chap. vii), published in the year
oaches indecenc
se of language which apprprom
is characterized by a licenrest
inent fault of
in speech is a
In general, lack of raintavor
lang
loy the uage of the
Luther’s, arising from his heendewas assitostedempby
his descent from the
common people, whereinthat he found low plea
in sexual matpeasantry. It is not trueessions are hardly ever sure
employed for the
ters. His uncouth expr al passion, even though Mode
must often
sake of exciting the sexu fairly wallows in the miresty
of base bodily
veil her countenance. He

to Luther,
this expression prior
the occurrence of ische
III, p. 253. On Beitr
83 Grisar, Luther,nsVol.
te, 1915,
chich
enges
Kirch
n
cf. the investigatio of G. Buchwald in ige zur Sichs
:
241 599 and infra, Ch. XVIIL, n. 2.
84 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol.pp.1II,92 pp.
sq4q.; Erl. ed., Vol. LI, pp. 1 sqq.

n. 29, Leipzig, 1916.

85 Weimar ed., Vol. XII,

260

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

functions, especially in his vigorous denunciation of his opponents.
He liked to hurl the most vulgar filth into the faces of his enemies,
after he had stirred it up with something akin to glee. He was excelled by no one in this respect either among his contemporaries
or in the succeeding so-called age of frank utterance, yes, we may
add, not even in the earlier centuries of the Middle Ages, which
were not exactly noted for delicacy of speech. In this characteristic
quality, he stands forth as a giant, even in his earlier writings, which

are now under discussion. Later on, his dexterity increased
in an
astounding degree. The apologetical references of his defender
s to

the indelicate language of his age, therefore, are valid only in
a
very restricted measure. His contemporaries, his nearest friends

are shocked at the filthy material which is at his disposal

peramental outbursts against his adversaries.8¢

King Henry VIII, of England, who was well versed

even,

in his tem-

'
in theology,

violently attacked Luther as a heretic in 1521, in
his “Defense of
the Seven Sacraments,” for which the Pope conferred
upon him the
title of “Defender of the Catholic Faith.” Luther’s
reply to Henry’s
book (1523) was published in both Latin and German
.®” It abounds

in vulgar attacks upon the King. In this
work he says he wishes

once more “to uncover the infamy
of the Roman harlot” and de-

clares “the harlot-countenance” of the king is
brazen because of his
defense of the “purple harlot of Rome, the drunk
en mother of impurity.”

This fool, he says among other things
, this excrement of swine and asses,
wishes to defile the crown of my heaven
ly King of glory with the filth of

his body; but the dung must be cast upon

rascal and buffoon, a monstrosity of

him, who is nothing but a lying

a fool.8

With disgust the highly educated Engli

cognizance of the filthy language

sh chancellor, Thomas More, took

in this and other Latin works of

In a “Reply to Luther’s Calumnies,” which

Luther.

he published in 1§23 under an

assumed name, this eminent human
ist wrote in a style which fortu
nately
was not habitual with him: “[Lut
her] has nothing in his mouth
but stench,
filth

and dung. These he scatters about

86 See my Luther, references in the

him more abusively and obscenely

index, Vol. VI, ». “Abusive language,”

“Unseemliness
of Luther’s language.”
87 Weimar ed., Vol. X, II, pp. 180
sqq., 227 sq. Opp. Lat. Var., XI,
PP. 385 38qq., and
Erl. ed., Vol.
XXVIII, pp. 343 sqq.
88 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, PP.

152 sqq.

LUTHER’S CONTINUED ATTACKS

261

than ever did churl. . . . If he continues to cultivate this vituperative manner of speech and to talk of nothing else but cloaca, latrines and excrements,

then may others do as they please; we shall turn our backs upon his filth
and abandon him to his vile discharges.” 8°
In this same work against King Henry VIII, Luther says: “Through me
Christ has commenced His revelations concerning the abominations in the holy
place.” “I am certain that I have my dogmas from heaven,” “but the devil
tries to deceive me through Henry;” “God blinds the devil, that his men-

dacity is made manifest through me.” The King, he says, proves the truth
of the saying that there are no greater fools than kings and princes.

One is compelled to ask, what demagogical effects such frenzied

language was likely to produce in an agitated world, when the
respect due to civil authority was trampled under foot even in such
works of Luther as his treatise “On Secular Authority.”

‘Among the other polemical writings which Luther produced during these years mention should be made of his Latin work, “Against
the Armed Man Cochlaeus,” whom he ridicules as a combative

knight because of his report of their interview at Worms and his
defense of the Sacraments.®® Cochlaeus, himself an effective con-

troversialist, replied in a work that bore a no less poignant title,
“Against the Cowled Minotaur of Wittenberg,”* in which he
seriously but unsuccessfully applies to Luther the legend of the abortive calf of Freiberg, claiming that it condemned him.
In opposition to the canonization of Bishop Benno of Meissen,

Luther, in 1524, wrote his sermon “Against the New Idol and Olden
Devil about to be set up at Meissen.” 2 By means of this outrageous
sermon he intended to counteract the favorable influence which the
Catholic cause was likely to derive from the imminent canonization

of the venerable Bishop Benno and his elevation as patron saint of
Saxony, a project which was promoted by Duke George.
Eager to increase his followers, Luther at that time also cast his
eyes upon the Jews. He imagined that the Jews were inclined to
if
£avor him and could be attracted to his cause. What gain and glory
ideas
These
Gospel!
true
the
to
Israel
of
he should convert the people

: “Capiemus
89 The Latin text in Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 237, note 1. It concludes
ue recacatumq
cacantem
us
stercorib
et
merdis
suis
cum
consilium . . . sic bacchantem
linquere.”
90 Weimar ed., Vol. XI, pp. 295 sq.; Opera Lat. Var, Vol. VII, pp. 44 s99.
91 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 644.

92 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, pp. 183 sqq.; Erl. ed,, Vol. XXIV, 2nd ed., pp. 247 saq. Cf.

Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 123.

262

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

inspired his little treatise, “That Christ was Born a Jew.” ®3 In this
work, published in 1523, he relies on the prophecies which foretell the
conversion of the Jews at the end of the world. “God grant that the
time is near at hand, as we hope.” His desire to win over the Jews

remained unrealized; his hatred of Judaism afterwards induced him
to launch the most unheard-of attacks upon them.

In the midst of his fretful and many-sided labors he yet found
leisure to write works on social questions. His small tract against

usury, published in 1519, and his “Great Sermon” of 1520 on the
same subject, were followed, in 1524, by the publication of a
pamphlet, “On Mercantile Trade and Usury.” ¢ His writings on

usury, to which was added another work in 1540, testify
to the
active interest which he took in the moral aspects of the progress

of trade and commerce occasioned by the discoveries and the
more
intimate intercourse between nations resulting from them. In
his
work “Von Kaufshandlung,” he again prohibits the taking
of interest. “Whoever lends in such wise as to receive more
in return,
is a public and condemned usurer.” For the rest, this treatise
contains many stimulating ideas and furnishes an insight into
the conditions of the time. But the author undeniably goes too
far in his
demand that the existing commerical societies ought to be
abolished.
He lacked the necessary breadth of view and practica
l experience
to pass judgment on such a question. The desire to
represent the new
doctrine as useful for a general reform was not
sufficient, and
Scriptural passages, especially from the Old Testame
nt, could not
be generalized so as to apply to all times and conditions.
Luther’s modern admirers have highly praised one
of his works,
written to improve the condition of the schools.
It is entitled “To
the Aldermen of all the Cities of Germany, that They
Should Establish and Maintain Christian Schools,” 95 the emphas
is being on the
word “Christian.” This appeal was occasi
oned by the observation
that his cause was injured by the deterioratio
n of the schools resulting from the religious controversy he had
started. It was his inten93 Weimar ed., Vol. XI, PP. 314 sqq.; Erl.
ed, Vol. XXIX, pp. 45

Luther, Vol. V, pp. 411 sq.
94 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, pp- 293
Luther, Vol. V, pp. 79 5qq.

sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXII, pp.

199

sqq. Cfr. Grisar,
sqq. Cfr. Grisar,

95 Weimar ed., Vol. XV, Pp- 27 sqq.;
Erl. ed,, Vol. XXII, pp. 168 sqq.. Cfr.
Grisar,
Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 3 sqq.; also my
article on “Luther” in the Pidagogisches
Lexikon,
new edition by Roloff.

LUTHER’S CONTINUED ATTACKS

263

tion, as he himself expressly confessed, to obtain the necessary spiritual and secular forces for the promotion of his Gospel by
re-establishing Christian schools, i. e., schools in which the new religion
was inculcated. Besides practicable suggestions regarding education,
the pages of this work are burdened with inconceivably crass accusa-

tions against the educational policy of the ancient Church, on which
he wishes to inflict a mortal wound in the name of education by
means of the Scriptures.

It was impossible for Luther, in discussing such questions as the
nature of trade and education, to abandon the controversial narrowness which marked his ecclesiastical position.

In his literary activity, his predilection was Holy Writ. He provided
the books of the New Testament which he translated into German

with prefaces that characterize his standpoint in regard to the Bible
and theology. The most significant thing in the latter regard is his

preface to the Epistle to the Romans. It is little less than an epitome

of his theological teaching, especially as it centers around the idea

that St. Paul condemns “the entire ulcerous and reptilian complex
of human laws and commandments which drowns the world at pres-

ent” and teaches the doctrine of justification by faith alone.®® His
general preface to the New Testament is equally noteworthy, as it

emphasized that those portions of the Scriptures are the best which

show “how faith in Christ gives life, justice, and happiness.” Hence

his preference for “the Gospel of St. John and his first Epistle, the
Epistles of St. Paul, particularly those addressed to the Romans, the
Galatians, and the Ephesians, and the first Epistle of St. Peter; these
are the books which reveal Christ. . . . They advance far beyond
the three Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. . . . Compared with

them, St. James® Epistle is an epistle of straw, since there is nothing
evangelical about it.”
In this manner his criticism of the Bible proceeds along entirely
subjective and arbitrary lines. The value of the sacred writings is

venerable
measured by the rule of his own doctrine. He treats the certitu
de.
all
ates
annihil
which
canon of Scripture with a liberty
and
on
traditi
sacred
of
tee
guaran
t
For, while this list has the highes
ent the
the backing of the Church, Luther makes religious sentim
Bible,
the
to
belong
books
criterion by which to decide which
96 See the conclusion of the preface to Romans, 1522. Cfr. Erl, ed., Vol. LXIII, pp.

for a collection of Luther’s prefaces,

7 5qq,

264

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

which are doubtful, and which are to be excluded. At the same time
he practically abandons the concept of inspiration, for he says nothing of a special illuminative activity of God in connection with the
writers’ composition of the Sacred Book, notwithstanding that he
holds the Bible to be the Word of God because its authors were sent
by God. As is well known, during the age of orthodox Lutheranism

its devotees fell into the other extreme by teaching so-called verbal

inspiration, according to which every single word of the Bible has
been dictated by God. Catholic theology has always observed a
golden mean between these extremes.
Luther always adhered essentially to his opinion of the Epistle of St. James
as quoted above.®” Relative to the other Biblical writings, his most striking

assertions will be considered in the sequel. Even at the Leipsic disputation
he had maintained that the second book of Machabees did not belong to the
canon simply because of the difficulty presented by the passage quoted by
Eck concerning Purgatory and prayers for the departed.®® Later he simply

excluded the so-called deutero-canonical books of the Old Testament from
the list of sacred writings. In his edition they are grouped together at the

end of the Old Testament under the title: “Apocrypha, . e., books not to be

regarded as equal to Holy Writ, but which are useful and good to read.”
Under this title the Lutheran Bible retains the following arrangement even

to the present day: Judith, Wisdom, Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Machabees I and II, parts of Esther and of Daniel. Luther’s New Testament is
somewhat more conservative. After the Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles,
and the Epistles, it contains the Epistles to the Hebrews, those of St. James
and St. Jude—three epistles which Luther carped at—and, lastly, the
Apocalypse of St. John.

It is a fact that must not be overlooked that the parts of the Bible
which Luther retained were taken over from the tradition of the

past. By way of exception and as a matter of necessity, he thus

con-

ceded the claims of tradition. Though otherwise opposed to it,
he
took it as his guide and safeguard in this respect without admitting
the fact. Thus his attitude towards the Bible is really burdened
with
“flagrant contradictions,” to use an expression of
Harnack, especially since he “had broken through the external
authority of the

written word” by his critical method.?® And of
97 Cfr. Grisar, Lutker, Vol. V, PP. $21
sqq.
98 1bid.

99 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, PP 403
sq,

this, Luther is guilty,

FREE CHRISTIANITY

265

the very man who elsewhere represents the Bible as the sole principle
of faith!
If, in addition to this, his arbitrary method of interpretation is
taken into consideration, the work of destruction wrought by him
" appears even greater. The only weapon he possessed he wrested from
his own hand, as it were, both theoretically and in practice.
His procedure regarding the sacred writings is apt to make
thoughtful minds realize how great is the necessity of an infallible
Church as divinely appointed guardian and authentic interpreter
of the Bible. Deprived of the guidance of the Church, with subjectivism as his lodestar, Luther trod the path that led to an in-

dependent religion severed from divine revelation and therefore with-

out foundation.
7. FREE CHRISTIANITY AND THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL

When, in the period from 1520 to about 1525, Luther approached
his doctrine of so-called free Christianity without binding dogmas,*®°
he nevertheless revealed glimpses of an intention of adhering to
the norms of the Christian religion. He speaks with vigor about

truths undeniably based upon tradition and guaranteed by the Bible.
In brief, he desired to be a true Christian. But the inexorable logic
of his subjectivistic system produced a different result. It compelled
him with the force of gravity, as it were, to abandon his positive
foundation, notwithstanding his refusal to admit it to himself, since

he does not follow out his conclusions to the end, but turns back
after having gone halfway. It is impossible to form any other
opinion of his expectorations, so often influenced by passion and
saturated with rhetoric. Not infrequently they contain appeals to
liberty which are irreconcilable with true Christianity. Evidently
this phenomenon is associated with the impetuosity which animated
him at the outset of his career. Under unfavorable circumstances

he was not capable of moderating his temperament. In the stress of
his labors he did not weigh his words. Inclined to doubt and criticism,
his great success on the stage of the world swept him on to further
doubt and criticism.

Only when the fanatical sects' increased in strength, did a re-

action set in, which caused him to favor a more positive attitude.
100 1pid., Vol. III, pp. 9 sqq.; V, 432 sqq.

266

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

In his attacks upon them, his fear of a free Christianity gained the

upper hand, prudence asserted her claims, and there came a time
when Luther reversed his views and corrected his utterances. In-

stead of making internal experience and spiritual relish the sole
criterion, he now emphasized (especially after 1525) the so-called
external Word of God and the authority of the Bible, in so far
as they seemed to him clear and indisputable. He placed the rule of
faith in the foreground and conceded greater importance to good
works. The sight of the general decadence and the dissolving effects
of his sermons on Christian freedom in opposition to the law, compelled him more and more to desist from his attacks on the motive
of fear of punishment in the fulfillment of the commandments.
When, finally, the Peasants’ Revolt began to shake the foundations of
the social and moral order, his return to positive religion became more
pronounced, or, as has been said, he turned from the free Evangel
to the legal structure of a Protestantism under state control.
Nevertheless, his early utterances on freedom and intellectual
liberty are re-echoed in his later ones. The primitive fallacy of his
system could not be eradicated. It took only certain impacts to strike
his excitable mentality and cause him once more to espouse the cause
of unrestricted liberty.
In the period of his early activity, i. e., before 1525, while Luther
was engaged in his struggle with the papacy and, in part, with himself,
he expressed himself as follows concerning the rights of subjectivism:
“Neither the pope nor the bishop nor any other man has the right to
dictate even so much as a syllable to a Christian believer, except with the
latter’s consent.” Formerly, under the papacy, we had “no right to form

an opinion,” but now “all councils have been overthrown.” No one, he says,
may “command what men must believe.” “If I am to know what is false

doctrine, I have the right to judge.” Let others arrive at whatever decision they
please, “I also have the right to judge, whether I will accept it or not. . . .

You yourself must be able to say, this is right, that is wrong. . . . God
must tell you deep down in your heart: this is the Word of God.” Autonomy,

according to him, is to be maintained at all times,’®* even towards the

sermons which every member of the congregation may criticize, reject or
accept.’®® In fact, private judgment is to be exercised even in relation to
himself (so he says incidentally); for “no one is bound to believe me, let

each one look to himself. To warn all I am able, but stop any man I can101 1bid., Vol. IV, pp. 482 sqq.
102 Sy pra, No. 4 of this chapter.

FREE CHRISTIANITY

267

not.” 1°% “If we all are priests, how then shall we not have the right to
discriminate and judge what is right or wrong in faith?” “A lowly man
may have the right opinion; why, then, should it not be followed?” The
Bible may be interpreted by everyone, even by a “humble miller’s maid, nay,
by a child of nine if it has the faith.” *%*

He intoned hymns of liberty relative to the commandments, particularly
in his work on “The Freedom of a Christian,” and thus brought about dire
results because of the confusion they created. Once you have comprehended
the Word by faith, he expressly says, “all commandments are fulfilled and
you shall be free in all things.” “No one can be forced.” 1°°
Is the reception of the Sacraments also a free matter? In 1521 Luther
declared: “Every individual ought to be free with regard to the reception
of the Sacraments. If anyone does not wish to be baptized, let him please

himself about it. If anyone does not wish to receive holy communion, that
is his precious right. Also, if anyone does not wish to confess, that is his
right before God.” 1°¢ He had already disposed of confession as a Sacrament.

With respect to Baptism and Communion, however, he subsequently defends
the necessity of receiving them. In 1521 he writes in another work: “I
approve of faith and Baptism, but no one should be compelled; everyone
ought to be exhorted and to exercise liberty in these matters.” Perhaps

his confused declarations relative to Baptism and Communion are intended
to exclude only physical coercion, whilst at the same time he completely
spurns confession as such. Yet, according to his whole system (as many
modern Protestant theologians admit), Baptism would not be necessary be-

n dispensed
cause “salvation is possible without Baptism”; since “the salvatio
ntalinstrume
the
through
d
in the Sacrament is none other than that obtaine
affirmed
be
to
is
same
The
.
Haupt)
(Erich
ity of the Word of the sermon”
of the Lord’s Supper. Consequently, according to Luther, Christ instituted
Sacraments the use of which depends upon the good pleasure of men.

Such expressions—which could be multiplied considerably—lead
the comus to the very brink of religious radicalism. In the heat ofg which
, it
bat against the dogmatic teachings of the papacy, durinaimed comis true, he did not always weigh his words, Luther proclkind of soplete anarchy. Modern liberal Protestantism loves this

e” in the history
called liberty. Harnack styles it a “rich spring-tid
ely, it was not folof Luther’s development, though, unfortunatthose
years,” he says,
In
.
.
.
r.
lowed by a “full-blown summe
103 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 392.

104 1pid., Vol. 11, p. 31; Vol. IV, p. 389.
105 Jpid., Vol. III, p. 11; Vol. IV, pp. 487 sq.
108 1pid., Vol. III, pp. 9 sqq.

3

268

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

“Luther was elevated above himself and apparently overcame the
Jlimitations of his own individuality.” In contrast with the demand
of numerous contemporary Protestant theologians, who plead for
a return to Luther as he appeared in the spring of life, when, as
they allege, he was truly liberal-minded, we may quote this remarkable statement by Frederick Paulsen, the famous Protestant

philosopher and historian: “The principle . . . to allow no authority

on earth to prescribe the faith is anarchical. And on these lines
there can be no church with the right of examining candidates for
the ministry and holding visitations of the clergy, as Luther did.”
This author furthermore says that “Luther as pope,” which he
really wanted to be, glaringly contradicts that principle. ““Whoever
stands in need of a pope, had better be advised to stick to the real
one at Rome.” Fundamentally, Paulsen asserts, “an antinomy lies at
the very root of the Protestant Church,” namely: “There can be
no earthly authority in matters of faith, and: There must be such
an authority.” 107
The religion which Luther cultivated in spite of his urge for
liberty was the religion of the enslaved will. He ascribed so much
influence to the omnipotence of God and to what he calls grace,
that man’s liberty to perform moral and meritorious acts was completely shattered. Now free-will was constantly and rightly regarded
as the preliminary condition of divine worship. “God created thee
without thy aid,” says St. Augustine, “but He does not desire to
justify thee without thy co-operation.” Luther, however, treats
man like a block of wood in matters pertaining to salvation. As
he expresses it, man is ridden like a beast by God or by the devil.
Erasmus in 1523 decided to publish an attack on Luther’s denial

of the doctrine of free-will.'1’8 As a humanist he was particularly
interested in defending the freedom of the will. On the other hand,

Luther’s obstinate negation of free-will was one of the most vulnerable spots in his doctrinal armor, against which an attack could

be most easily launched with the prospect of winning wide-spread
applause. It had not been an easy matter to persuade Erasmus to
take this resolution. For he had long favored Luther at least
to the
extent of warmly approving his campaign not only against
the
existing abuses, but also against certain perfectly justifiable religious
107 1bid., Vol. 1V, p. 485.
108 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 223 8qq.

263

FREE-WILL

usages and necessary ecclesiastical institutions, which he himself
was also wont to criticize. After Luther’s open rupture with the
Church (1520) the cautious Erasmus became more and more guarded
in his utterances relative to the religious innovation.!® Amid his
epistolary compliments to Luther one may read his assurance, that
he would never separate himself from the divinely instituted spirit-

ual authority of the Church; that he did not wish to bother about
the clash provoked by the religious controversy, but desired to pursue
his studies unperturbed; and that God had sent the strong medicine
which Luther administered in order to purge His Church, since
Christ had been well-nigh forgotten. It required remonstrations on
the part of men in high authority, even in Rome, of the King of

England and of the Emperor, to determine Erasmus to take up his

pen against Luther.

:

In the spring of 1524 Luther heard that his erstwhile patron was

engaged in composing a book against him. He correctly appraised
the influence which Erasmus would exert upon the numerous hu-

manistic parties which had formerly favored him, but had become
estranged from his cause as a result of his violent activities. The
voice of their highly revered leader was bound to turn the scales
against him. Hence, in April, he wrote a strange letter to Erasmus,
then at Basle. He said that he had nothing to fear from an attack, but,
after flattering his antagonist for his rare qualities and merits, begs

him: “Do not write against me, or increase the number and strength
of my opponents; particularly do not attack me through the press,
and 1, for my part, shall also refrain from attacking you.” “With patience and respect,” he continues, he had observed that Erasmus, alas,

did not possess grace from above to comprehend the new Evangel.110

Erasmus’s treatise appeared at Basle in 1524; it was written in

excellent Latin and bore the title: “De Libero Arbitrio Diatribe”
(Discourse on Free-Will). The author triumphantly refutes the
heresy of the enslaved will, and despite his great and often timid

reserve, his critical rejection of the Biblical supports of Luther’s

theory is quite as brilliant as his use of the sacred text in defense

of the Catholic doctrine.

According to Luther, he says, not pnly goodness, but also moral evil must
be referred to God, which, however, conflicts with God’s nature and is ex109 1pid., Vol. II, pp. 249 sq.
110 1bid., p. 260.

270

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

cluded by His holiness. Luther maintains that God punishes sinners who
cannot be held accountable for their misdeeds. Hence, so far as this earthly
life is concerned, laws and penalties are superfluous, because there can be
no responsibility without freedom of choice.

“In defending free-will,” thus writes the Protestant theologian A. Taube,
“Erasmus fights for responsibility, duty, guilt, and repentance—ideas which
are essential to Christian piety.” “He vindicates the moral character of the

Christian religion. . .

111

It was not to be expected that Erasmus, who was a stranger to
Scholasticism, would enter upon a technical discussion of his topic.
Nor was it exactly necessary, although many points might have been
made more telling, as, for instance, the refutation of Luther’s doctrine

of absolute predestination. The Catholics were highly elated at the
“Djatribe” of Erasmus. Duke George of Saxony thanked him in
a letter, but, in his frank and honest way, did not suppress the caustic remark: “Had you come to your present decision three years ago,
and withstood Luther’s shameful heresies in writing, instead of merely
opposing him secretly, as though you were not willing to do him
much harm, the flames would not have extended so far.” 1'? The

“Diatribe” also met with the approval of close friends of Luther.
Wolfgang Capito had previously declared his opposition to Luther’s
theory of the enslaved will. Peter Mosellanus (Schade) of Leipsic

had spoken so strongly against Luther’s theses and his teaching on
predestination that warning reports were sent to Wittenberg. George
Agricola, the learned naturalist, who at first admired Luther, was
repelled by his denial of free-will.?*® Melanchthon, to whom, despite
his former approval, this denial became painful in the course of time,
thanked his friend Erasmus for the moderation which he had observed.
He became more and more convinced that Erasmus was right in
certain cardinal theological points, and himself became an opponent
of determinism.!!*
8. COMPANIONS IN ARMS AT WITTENBERG

Next to Luther, the most attractive personality at the University
of Wittenberg was the young humanist and theologian Philip Me111 1bid., p. 263.
112 1pid., pp. 261 sq.
118 1bid., p. 242.
124 Ibid., pp. 261 sq.

COMPANIONS IN ARMS AT WITTENBERG

271

lanchthon, a small and emaciated man, endowed with a pair of
glowing eyes. The reputation for learning which this precocious
-youth enjoyed, powerfully attracted students. He lectured on Homer
and St. Paul’s Epistle to Titus, on rhetoric and the Gospel of St.
Matthew. Even after his transfer, in 1519, from the chair of Greek
to the theological faculty, he continued to occupy himself chiefly
with humanism, especially in his literary productions. He never
became a doctor of theology. He combined an excellent gift for

teaching with a love for youth and great sociability. His lectures
he flavored with instructive anecdotes, but never became rhetorical
or violent, like Luther. He had difficulty in overcoming his habit
of stuttering. In addition to his academic lectures he conducted a

schola privata for beginners, whom he, an ardent friend of youth,
prepared for the higher studies. In 1524 he published for their

benefit an “Enchiridion of the Elements for Boys.” It was a reader
composed of church prayers, passages from the Bible, and secular
material, such as moral axioms of the Seven Wise Men and excerpts from Plautus. Despite his many labors, Melanchthon knew
how to preserve his delicate health by a life of regularity and extraordinary abstemiousness. He rose early and devoted the first
hours of the morning to his extensive correspondence. His letters
were composed with great care and a facile and fluent Latinity

similar to that which distinguishes his printed works. In the use
of the German vernacular, however, he was far less skilled than

Luther.

Melanchthon’s domestic life presented attractive features. In the
fortress-like house which he occupied, and which still stands, he
constructed a quiet “sanctuary” reserved for intercourse with his
familiars and learned friends as well as for study. It was there he was
found by a French scholar who paid him a visit, rocking the baby’s

in his
cradle by means of a ribbon and reading a book which he held
of a
r
daughte
the
was
right hand. The wife of this lay-theologian

burgomaster, a quiet, sensible woman, like himself very charitable

towards the poor.

The nuns who left their convents and came to Wittenberg
were not welcome in Melanchthon’s home. Aside from the fact that
there were some among them who, like Catherine von Bora, flaunted
their noble descent too ostentatiously in the presence of Melanchthon’s wife, who belonged to the middle class, Melanchthon and

272

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

his spouse regarded with aversion the worldly conduct of these

nuns and their fawning upon Luther. Melanchthon, in a confidential
letter to Camerarius, couched in Greek, declared that they had “ensnared” Luther “with every kind of strategy.” The conduct of many
married clergymen and fugitive monks was likewise distasteful
to him.
.
Melanchthon became very sad when, on a journey to his native
town of Bretten in the Lower Palatinate (Baden), he was forced
to note the moral decadence which had set in as a consequence of
the religious controversy. According to a sufficiently authenticated
tradition, he frankly encouraged his mother (either at that time or
on. the occasion of a visit he paid her in 1529) not to be disturbed

by the religious controversies.!'® He well remembered the admonition of his father, the strictly religious George Schwarzerd, an
armorer by trade, who, nine days before his demise, had adjured
his family never to separate from the Catholic Church. The papal
nuncio Campeggio, on the occasion of his first visit, endeavored

through the instrumentality of his secretary, Nausea, to induce
Melanchthon to return to the mother Church, but the attempt proved
futile,
In 1521 Melanchthon championed Luther’s cause by publishing
a work against Thomas Rhadinus, an Italian antagonist of the
Reformation. In this work he went so far as to demand that the
authorities of the Empire should use force against the Pope. Soon
after he penned an attack upon the Paris Sorbonne. He merited
Luther’s highest esteem by his “Loci Communes Rerum Theologicarum.” “I esteem Philip like myself,” Luther wrote in September,
1523, “aside from the fact that he puts me to shame, nay, excels me,

in learning and virtue.”
118
Despite his disapproval of the extremes to which his friend Luther

went, Melanchthon was fascinated by his personality. He was not
sufficiently self-reliant, too much of a specialist and pliant Erasmian

to adopt a firm and consistent line of conduct. He aided Luther
at all times, by polishing with his skilled pen the latter’s impetuously
uttered thoughts and bringing them into some kind of scientific
form, though he would have preferred to escape from the too turbu115 15id., Vol. V, p. 270.
118 Letter to Billikan, September 17, 1523; Briefwechsel, IV, p. 230.

COMPANIONS IN ARMS AT WITTENBERG

273

lent struggle to devote himself entirely to his humanistic studies, without, of course, abandoning his “honored master” in his conflict
with the Roman Antichrist.
As early as 1525, it could be seen more clearly that Melanchthon
was animated by a desire to play the role of “Erasmian mediator”

in Lutheran theology. He thought the breach between the old and
the new theology could be healed and hoped for a conciliatory attitude on the part of the Catholic opposition, all the more fervently
in proportion as he, who was more timid and more keenly sensitive
than Luther, was affrighted at the consequences of the ecclesiastical
revolution. Accordingly he devoted himself to the humanities in order
to prepare the way for that vague religious unity which ever hovered
before his mind. Because of his extraordinary success in the humanistic field of learning his friends bestowed upon him the honorary title
of “Pracceptor Germaniae.” 117
Of quite a different stamp were the other men who stood closest
to Luther as friends and co-workers.
Justus Jonas, provost of the church of All Saints at Wittenberg,
was likewise a disciple of Erasmus, but was far less active in behalf
of humanism than in his support of Luther.'’® As doctor of both

canon and civil law, he had taught the latter at the University of
Wittenberg, but after his promotion to the theological doctorate
through Luther’s influence, entered the theological faculty and
boldly lectured on portions of the Bible, such as St. Paul’s Epistle to
the Romans. The neo-humanists of Erfurt and the school of Mutianus

introduced this unfortunate priest to the pleasures of life. He was
of a jovial and lively disposition. Luther derived much consolation and relaxation from his company. By translating his Latin works
into German, which he accomplished with great facility, Jonas rendered greater services to Luther than by his scholarship. His lack of

theological erudition and profundity were compensated by a firm,
nay, fanatical attitude. Few men have treated their opponents more

disgracefully and unfairly and with worse personal invectives than
Jonas. He entitled the Latin apology of his marriage, published in
1522, thus: “In defense of Clerical Marriage against John Faber,
the Patron of Harlotry.” Among the defects of his character, ac117 Cf, Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 319 sqq., 346 sqq., 360 sqq.

118 Jpid., Vol. ITI, pp. 413 sqq.

274

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

cording to G. Kawerau, was a “constant, often petty concern in
the increase of his income.” 119
A third co-worker of Luther was John Bugenhagen, a native of
Wollin in Pomerania, hence called “Pomeranus,” the intruding
city parson of Wittenberg.'2® After he had passed through the
humanistic current of his age, he attended private lectures in theology

at Luther’s side; though a priest, he had until then kept himself

rather aloof from theology. With his practical talents and energy,
which often degenerated into harshness, he, as parish priest of Wittenberg, commenced quite early to unfold an extensive activity for
the advancement of Lutheranism, both in the electorate of Saxony
and far beyond its confines. His ability as an organizer made him
indispensable to Luther, who eulogized him as “Bishop of the Church
of Wittenberg,” as the chief support of the “Evangel” besides his
Philip, as a great theologian and a man of nerve. Because he supplied
a (rather deficient) commentary on the Psalms, Luther said that
Bugenhagen was the “first on earth who deserved to be called interpreter of the Psalter.” 12! The most opposite of these epithets
was that of the “man of nerve”—multum habet nervorum. Késtlin
rightly characterizes Bugenhagen as “merely a subordinate, though
endowed by nature with considerable powers of mind and body.” 122
His various “church regulations” were of greater importance than
his writings. Energetically and successfully he defended Luther’s
doctrine of the Last Supper when the Swiss theologians denied the
real presence of Christ in the Eucharist in Zwingli’s letter to Albert
of Reutlingen and his treatise “On the True and False Religion,”
published in March, 1525.
Nicholas von Amsdorf, who first taught theology at Wittenberg,
became pastor and superintendent of the new religion in Magdeburg
in 1524, and as such always co-operated with Luther as his confi-

dential adviser.’*® Among all his friends he was most closely akin
to him in spirit and most appreciative of his mental sufferings and
struggles. He heartily concurred in the most unrestrained assertions
and outbursts of Luther, nay, possibly even outdid him. Luther
called him “a born theologian.” Later champions of orthodox
119 1bid., p. 416.
120 1bid., pp. 405 sqq.
121 1bid.

122 1bid., p. 407.

123 Ibid., p. 405.

COMPANIONS IN ARMS AT WITTENBERG

275

Lutheranism have glorified Amsdorf as the Eliseus of the Elias,
Luther, or even as a second Luther. The thick-set man with his
sharp features was a reckless enthusiast and became conspicuous by
his extreme views at the very outset of the struggle. In 1523 he
proclaimed it as his deliberate judgment that a Christian prince
is under obligation to bear arms in defense of the true Gospel. Luther
dedicated to him his “Address to the Nobility” and Melanchthon
his edition of “The Clouds” of Aristophanes. Amsdorf never married,
although he affirmed in one of his writings that marriage was a
divine command incumbent upon all priests.
Among Luther’s sympathizers in the secular faculties of Wittenberg University the jurist Jerome Schurf was the most conspicuous.

Luther also had sympathizers and active co-workers in the Augustinian Order during the initial stages of the new movement.
Pre-eminent amongst these was Wenceslaus Link, a man experienced

in business and fluent of speech. The Saxon congregation under

Staupitz comprised certain monasteries in the Low Countries, such
as Antwerp, Dordrecht, and Ghent. There Lutheranism took root,
especially through the efforts of two priors, Jacob Probst and Henry
Moller. The former was a native of Ypres, the latter of Ziitphen

(Sutphen). Probst evaded the severe censures of the edict, first by
issuing a denial of his teachings, and later (in August, 1522) by secretly escaping to Wittenberg. Moller likewise succeeded in reaching
Wittenberg before the censures became effective. In contrast with
these, two younger Augustinians were burned at the stake in Brussels,
the capital of the Low Countries, on July 1, 1523, in consequence

of their obstinate adherence to their heretical opinions. Their names
were Henry Vos and John van Eschen. Luther extolled them in his

hymn on the two so-called martyrs. A third Augustinian, Lambert
Thorn, who succeeded Probst in the office of preacher, was likewise condemned to death in Brussels, but escaped with his life for
unknown reasons.

Luther derived assistance also from the ranks of the Franciscans.
Thus he was aided by the popular orators John Eberlin and Henry

von Kettenbach, and by the writers Frederick Myconius and Conrad
Pellican. Among the Dominicans who rallied round his banner was
the talented young monk, Martin Bucer, whom he had partially
won over by the disputation at Heidelberg. The German Dominicans
did not furnish him with another man of repute, neither from the

276

THE SPREAD OF LUTHERANISM

Saxon nor from the Upper German province nor from the Upper

German congregation. On the whole, the Dominicans as well as the
Franciscans consistently and decisively maintained their Catholic position and opposed the religious innovation. They assigned their most
capable writers to enter the lists in defense of the ancient faith.
Oecolampadius left the Brigittine monastery at Altomiinster and
Ambrose Blaurer deserted thé Benedictine monastery of Alpirsbach to
join the new movement. Both labored with success in the interests of
the religious revolt.
Caspar Schwenckfeld, an eccentric and fanatical layman, was a
friend of Luther for many years. He intended to bring about a reformation of Christianity on the basis of Lutheranism along novel
lines of his own. He was born of a noble family in the duchy of
Liegnitz. When Luther took his stand against indulgences, Schwenckfeld was already inclined to join him. In the beginning of the twen-

ties he tried to persuade the prince of Liegnitz to introduce the new
religion into his native city and into all Silesia. Though a layman, he

preached with unction, and his captivating manners, coupled with
an impressive appearance, enabled him to win many adherents, es-

pecially among the nobility. 1?4 In his endeavor to arouse men to a

realization of the seriousness of life, he took offense at the omission of

good works from Luther’s doctrine and censured the loose conduct
which he observed about him, in his *“Admonition” against “carnal
liberty and the errors of the common people,” published in 1524. In
the following year he pretended to have received by private revelation a new doctrine of the Lord’s Supper which abandoned the Real

Presence of Christ in the Eucharist. His doctrine on the Eucharist
was not approved by Luther, Jonas and Bugenhagen, whom he visited

at Wittenberg, notwithstanding the fact that he did not incline to

the rationalistic theories of Zwingli. In vain he explained to Luther,

on December 1, 1525, his supposedly deeper conception of Christ’s
abiding survival in the faithful without a Eucharist, Sacraments or
a church. In the course of his exposition he ardently advised Luther
to abandon his idea of a congregational church with general communion and in lieu thereof establish congregations composed of revived Christians, such as Luther himself had dreamed of at times.
Luther did not wish to break with this influential man, but a breach
did come later. According to Schwenckfeld’s statement, Luther had
124 1bid., Vol. V, pp. 78 sqq.

COMPANIONS IN ARMS AT WITTENBERG

277

admitted the plausibility of his doctrine of the Eucharist, even though

it was as yet undemonstrated, and declared: “Dear Caspar, wait a

little while.” Probably he merely intended in this fashion to get rid
of the importunate Schwenckfeld. The latter, however, was not in-

clined to wait, but provoked an open controversy, in which, without
entirely denying Luther’s teaching, he frankly and severely exposed
its weaknesses, particularly in their moral implications. His example
reveals anew how the arbitrary subjectivism of Luther aroused opposition on the part of his adherents and introduced chaos into the very
bosom of the new religion.

For the rest, Schwenckfeld was one of the few men who, having
entered into relations with Luther, refused to succumb to the fascination of his personality. The friends whom we have enumerated
above, and many others, yielded to that exceedingly powerful charm.
There is abundant evidence of the superior force which he exercised

in his personal intercourse with others, such as John Kessler, Albert
Burrer, Peter Mosellanus, and, at a later date, Mathesius, Spangen-

berg, Aurifaber, Rhegius, and Cordatus. All agree that there was
something charming about his affability, his attractive speech, and

constancy in the midst of trouble. 12 One may say that he was by
nature endowed with an immense power of suggestion, intensified by
his exterior appearance, particularly by his flashing eyes. In addition,

the influence of his personality was augmented by the glory of his
unexampled success.

128 Jbid., Vol. 1V, pp. 268 sqq.

CHAPTER XI

THE

TEMPESTUOUS

YEAR,

1525—LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

For various reasons the year 1525 must be called a tempestuous
year. First of all the Peasants’ War stamped its character upon it.
Germany experienced tumults such as it had never seen before, which

shook Luther’s work and influenced his mind. Seldom was he so vehemently perturbed as during these momentous months, in the
course of which, strange to say, occurred his marriage.

The year 1525 witnessed the formation, on the one hand, of a more

compact union of the Catholic princes opposed to
the new move-

ment, and, on the other, the preparation of the fatal
Protestant

alliance of Torgau and the emergence of the war-like figure of Philip
of Fessen. It marked the energetic assembly of Mayence, which
fanncu the fury of Luther, but also the defection of extensiv
e terri

tories, among them Prussia, and the violent introduction

ligious change in the electorate of Saxony, brought

of the re-

about by the new

Elector. Luther was compelled to wrestle with the

Anabaptists and
c camp, and with

other fanatics, with powerful enemies in the Catholi

the triumphal march of Erasmus’ polemical pamphlet
on free-will, to
which, in 1525, he opposed his treatise “On the Enslav
ed Will,” a
work begotten literally in storm and stress.
Beyond the German frontier Emperor Charle
s was engaged in a

sanguinary contest with the king of France

. Francis was captured at

Pavia, but the victory of the imperial arms led to

serious conflicts with

the Italian States and with Pope Clement VII.
At the same time,
the power of the Turks assumed menacing propor
tions along the
eastern border of the Empire and in the Medite

signs of an energetic: defense, which was made

rranean Sea, with no

impossible by the un-

settled state of the Catholic forces and Luther’s

Christian undertakings against the Turks.
I.

LUTHER

AND

THE

PEASANTS

hostility towards the

WAR

In 1524, the cities of Allstedt and Orlam
iinde in Thuringia

been violently excited by Thomas Miinzer and
278

had

Karlstadt, respectively.

