CHarTER IX

LUTHER’S SOJOURN AT THE WARTBURG
I.

STORMS

WITHIN

AND

WITHOUT

At the Wartburg, Luther vested himself in the costume of a
cavalier and allowed his beard and hair to grow. In order to conceal

his identity, he assumed the name of Squire George (Ritter Gorg).
He wrote to Melanchthon
at Wittenberg that he would not recognize
him if he were to meet him. On the tenth day of his stay, he says
in a letter to Spalatin: “I sit idle here the livelong day and eat more

than enough.” But soon he found an occupation; for in the same
letter he says: “I read the Bible in Greek and Hebrew. I shall write
a German sermon on the freedom of auricular confession; I shall
continue my commentaries on the Psalms and my sermons as soon
as the necessary materials arrive from Wittenberg. From there I also

expect to obtain the Magnificat which I have begun.”! He did
not carry out all these plans, however. But the period of quiet re-

tirement became for him a time of gigantic labors, chiefly devoted to
a direct attack upon the teachings and the power of Antichrist,

whose determined opposition to the Gospel he believed to have experienced at Worms. In one of his first letters we hear: “While I
quietly sojourn here, I contemplate the face of the Church all day,
and hear the voice of the Psalmist raised to God: Why hast Thou

made all the children of men in vain? (Ps. lxxxviii, 48). O God,
what a horrible monster of divine wrath is this execrable empire of
the Roman Antichrist. I curse the hardness of my heart, since I
do not completely dissolve in tears because of the murdered sons of

my people.” 2

/
The frame of mind expressed in these rhetorical words to Melanchthon, continued during the ten months of his sojourn at the

1 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 154; May 14, 1521.

21bid., p. 148; letter to Melanchthon, May 1a.
194

»

STORMS WITHIN AND WITHOUT

195

Wartburg. It was there he was to receive, as it were, his spiritual

baptism in preparation for his future work.
His room at the Wartburg was an unpretentious cell, situated not
within the castle itself, but in the outbuildings set apart for ordinary

guests. He had no elevating outlook upon the green mountains,
which some biographers picture him contemplating from his room.

Nor was his cell equipped with the oft-admired bay-window, which

was added to the corner room only about a century ago. The room,
which is much frequented to-day, is reached by ascending a steep,

narrow flight of stairs. It is stocked with numerous souvenirs of
doubtful authenticity. There “Squire George,” secluded from intercourse with others, was attended by servants of the castle. The castle
itself made a rather unfavorable impression, its upkeep having
been neglected for a long time. The bare walls harmonized with the

disposition of the new inmate. A priest conducted divine services for
the castellan and a few domestics and rare guests. Luther avoided the
society of the “mass-priest.” At times he participated in the chase,
more for the sake of appearances than for diversion.
So secretly kept was his seclusion, that even for months afterwards

but few knew of his whereabouts. Many supposed that he had been
abducted by his enemies, others that he had been assassinated. Among
those who anxiously desired information about him was Albrecht

Diirer, the famous painter, who was on intimate terms with Pirkheimer, Luther’s patron at Nuremberg, and favorably disposed
towards the reforms which Luther had promised, without as yet

realizing the full import of his religious changes.?

During the first few days of his sojourn at the Wartburg, Luther
was very much concerned over reports of violence at Erfurt. In
his opinion, the demonstrations in his behalf were going too far. On

the day following his departure from Erfurt, which he visited on
his journey to Worms, he heard that the students, assisted by a mob,
had risen against the canons of the church of St. Severin, who

the
were loyal to their faith, and had stormed the dwellings of ted
reénac
were
scenes
These
s.
excesse
of
canons, committing all kinds
with the permission of the academic senate and the authorities on
hed
several days in June. Fundamentally Luther himself had furnishad
he
which
hatred
the
by
the cause of these demonstrations
aroused against the Catholics at Erfurt. This same hatred burst
8 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 39, 41 5q.

196

‘

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

forth anew when the clergy, who had participated in the festive
reception in honor of Luther, were threatened with exclusion from
choral service and from their benefices because they had also become
subject to the edict of outlawry. Luther deplored the whole violent
movement in a letter to Wittenberg: “This kind of procedure will
bring our Gospel into disrepute and justly bring about its repudiation. . . . Satan attempts to mock our endeavors.’””* His Gospel,

however, was exposed to other and still greater annoyances from
without. In the meantime he sought relief from his own mental
storms by resorting to controversy.

During the first two months of his sojourn at the Wartburg, his
lengthy reply to Ambrosius Catharinus was printed.® In comparison
with his previous writings, this reply was especially striking on account of the visionary application of the real or apparent Biblical
passages concerning Antichrist. In the application of these texts

to his idea of the papacy, he indulges in a kind of dreamy fanaticism.
In his opinion the prophet Daniel (viii, 28) had definitely foretold
the different characteristics of Antichrist which were realized in
the pope. The enemy of God, according to Luther’s (false) translation of Daniel, has different “faces,” which are all discoverable in
minute detail in anti-Christian Rome. According to Daniel, he held,

the spirit out of the mouth of God, not force and human fury, will
kill Antichrist and that within a brief space; for the Lord and
His day are nigh. This work was intended to be that production of
which his tract on the Babylonian Captivity was the prelude. Undoubtedly it is representative of the mental excitement with which

Luther was seized at the Wartburg.
During his first week at the castle, he composed his treatise Von
der Beicht (“On Confession—Whether the Pope has Power to Im-

pose it”). It was dedicated on June 1 to Franz von Sickingen as

his “special lord and patron.” ¢ Confession, as imposed by the papacy,
he asserts therein, is an unauthorized and insidious institution, whereas

private confession made to anyone, even to a layman, if entirely

voluntary, is a “precious and wholesome thing,” because of the
humiliation it involves and the comfort produced by the consolatory
words of one’s fellowman. Absolution received in this manner alone
4 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 158; letter to Melanchthon, about the middle of ‘May.
¥ Werke, Weimar ed., VII, pp. 705 sqq.; Erl. ed., Opp. Lat. Var., V, pp. 289
sqq.
® Werke, Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 138 sqq.; Erl. ed., XXVII, pp. 318 sqq.

STORMS WITHIN AND WITHOUT

197

corresponds with the liberty of a Christian. In general, no one may
be compelled to receive the Sacraments, just as no one may be or can
be compelled to accept the faith.
It is not likely that Sickingen went to excess either in, receiving

the Sacrament of Penance or free lay-confession. His two castles
in the Palatinate, Ebernburg and Landstuhl, were asylums for the
friends of the new religious movement and the revolution. Elected
captain of the “Fraternal Union of Knighthood,” in. August, 1522,
he declared war against the Archbishop of Treves, Richard von

Greiffenklau, and, after an unsuccessful attack upon his episcopal
city, devastated the district about Treves and portions of the Palatinate. In May of the succeeding year, Sickingen succumbed to the
wounds he had sustained at the siege and capture of his fortress
Landstuhl by the princes who had allied themselves against him.
In his reply to Catharinus, Luther had interpreted one of the
“faces” of the supposed Antichrist (Daniel, ch. ix) as referring to

the papal universities. These high schools of Satan, he alleged, are
the waters of the bottomless pit described in the Apocalypse, whence
Jocusts with the power of scorpions issue as in a thick smoke. In

1518, a book had been issued against him by the University of
Louvain, which Luther declared to be the most thorough and the most
dangerous of all the works written against him. Its author was the
erudite theologian James Latomus (Masson). In the twelve days
intervening between June 8 and 20, Luther composed a reply to
Latomus, entitled, Rationis Latomianae Confutatio,’ wherein he attempts to refute the Catholic doctrine of sin and grace by citations

from the Bible, no other aids being available to him at the time.
A pronouncement made against his heresies by the theological faculty

of Paris he tried to dispose of by publishing a translation of this
document, accompanied by a preface and an epilogue.® He denounces
the faculty, which had been the glory of the Middle Ages, as “the
greatest spiritual harlot under the sun and the back-door to hell.” ®
Again he indulges his mania concerning the Antichrist and the end

of the world. The faculty is the sinful chamber “of the pope, the
true Antichrist.” “When the belly of these gentlemen of Paris
rumbles,” etc., they exclaim: “It is an article of faith.” Their actions
7 Weim. ed., VIII, pp. 43 sqq.; Opp. Lat. Var., V, pp. 395 sqq.
8 Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 267 sqq.; Erl. ed,, XXVII, pp. 379 sqq.
9 At the end of the publication.

198

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

are to him an additional proof that the “pope has not regarded us
otherwise than as unworthy to be . . . his privy, etc. . . . So many
noble-minded persons have been obliged to harbor the stench, dung,
and filth,” etc. His crudities are not deserving of full quotation.
It is worth while, however, to mention here the works which
Luther composed during his brief sojourn at the Wartburg; particular
reference will be made to some of them in the sequel. They are: the
Verbandlungen zu Worms (“Transactions at Worms”) ; two treatises
against monastic vows; two against the Mass; the interpretation of

the Magnificat; a “Warning” against rebellion; a discourse on the
“Bull Caena Domini”’; an illustrated “Passional of Christ and Antichrist,” for which he was responsible at least in part; a Christmas
postil, and other explanations of Biblical texts, besides smaller polemical tracts, and, finally, his translation of the New Testament. Surely
no small amount of labor. Aided by Spalatin, Melanchthon, and other
friends, he entrusted the publication of his works to the Wittenberg
press.

What a contrast between the tender and charitable activity of the

sainted princess whose memory the Wartburg preserved and Luther’s

agitated labors, sustained mainly by strong hatred, passion, and a

slanderous disposition. St. Elizabeth with her loving heart for the

poor, with her loyal devotion to the Church, and her soul aglow with

prayer, everywhere confronted the man of the violent pen within
the castle-walls. There was the Kemenate where she had her quarters,
still in a state of beautiful preservation; there was the richly adorned
chapel, her favorite retreat; there, rising heavenward above the court,
was the tower whence she so often contemplated the splendor of her
celestial home in the mirror of nature.
The letters he wrote to his friends cast a lurid light upon Luther’s
frame of mind in the intervals between his oppressive labors. Anyone
who reads them would be greatly disillusioned had he expected that
the solitude which came to him as an extraordinary grace from above
would have induced Luther to reflect seriously upon himself or to examine quietly his activities which were fraught with so much respon-

sibility. Prayers, indeed, there are, brief and ardent prayers, for
himself and against his adversaries; but we miss the principal prayer,
the petition for complete submission to the divine will and the expression of willingness to be led anywhere, even to the abandon

ment

STORMS WITHIN AND WITHOUT

199

of his struggle, if it were God’s will.1® Instead of “Thy will be

done” one hears everywhere “My will be done”; so that the resignation of the soul to God, which Luther had so strongly emphasized in
the days of his so-called mysticism, now seems to be forgotten in a

cause so decisive for himself and for thousands of others. God should,
nay He must, so Luther thinks, place the seal of His approval upon
his revolt from the entire past of the Church.
Luther had to suffer much from temptations. ‘These were always
combated by devout Catholics by prayer accompanied by penance,
but no mention is made of penitential practices in the case of Luther.
He himself acknowledged his deficiency in the matter of prayer.!!
“Alas, I pray too little instead of sighing over the Church of God. . . .
For a whole week I have necither written, prayed nor studied, plagued
partly by temptations of the flesh, partly by the other trouble [constipation]. Pray for me, for in this solitude I am sinking into sin.”

A previous passage in this same letter says: “I burn with the flames of
my untamed flesh; in short, I ought to be glowing in the spirit, and instead

I glow in the flesh, in lust, laziness, idleness and drowsiness, and know not
whether God has not turned away His face from me, because you have
ceased to pray for me.”
A little later he writes: “I am healthy in body and am well cared for, but
I am also severely tried by sin and temptations. Pray for me, and fare you
well!” 22

Here, at all events, powerful sexual temptations (ferveo carne,
libidine, etc.) are openly acknowledged. As early as 1519, he had
written to his superior Staupitz concerning such visitations (Zitillationes)
.t® These assaults at the Wartburg, however are disagreeable
to him. His self-revelations are somewhat inflated by his habitually
superlative style of writing; and he may have referred the “sins”

which he mentions to sensuality, on the one hand, and, on the other,
to the frailty of his fduciary faith in God, which he made the center
10 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 511 sq.; more fully in the original German edition, Vol.
III, pp. 995 sqq.

11 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 82 sq.; cfr. V, pp. 225 sqq., letter to Melanchthon, July

13, I§2I.

:

12 Op, cit., II, p. 83; letter to Lang, December 18, 1521.

18 Op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 319 sqq.

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

200

of his Gospel. The devil, so he believed, ever and anon sought to de-

prive him of this faith.

Luther saw the Wartburg filled with devils. This, in part, was the
result of the fear of demons which he had imbibed in his youth; while
in part it was a consequence of the inquietude caused by his internal
doubts and self-reproaches. The voices of self-reproach he imagined
to be voices from the Satanic empire.

“Believe me,” he wrote on November 1, “that I am cast before a thousand
devils in this idle solitude. It is much easier to struggle with men, even if
they be incarnate devils, than with the spirits of iniquity that infest the air.
I fall, but the right hand of God sustains me.” 1*

According to another utterance of his, he wishes to praise God in the
name of his Gospel,—God who has not only given us this combat with the
spirits of iniquity, but has also revealed to us [revelavit nobis] that in this
matter it is not flesh and blood that take the field against us. . . . It is
Satan, who rages against us according to his way and within his limits.”
Tuus convinced of his great struggle against the evil spirits, he discovers,
in his own imagination, that they become visible and audible to him, as
will be shown in the following pages.

Meanwhile we must mention the internal struggle which he sustained when he had persuaded himself of the invalidity, nay, absolute
reprehensibility of the monastic vows and the vow of celibacy. It
was a violent struggle. Hitherto he had adhered to his monastic vow
of chastity as a matter of principle, but now his false idea of Christian liberty began to seduce him to break his vow.
Bartholomew Feldkirch (Bernhardi), provost of Kronberg, was
the first, or one of the first adherents of Luther among the clergy
who married during the time of Luther’s sojourn at the Wartburg.!®
Karlstadt, Luther’s tumultuous theological colleague at Wittenberg,
had published a tract against the vows. Not long afterwards, he,
too, took unto himself a wife. When Luther first heard of the movement

to

permit

the inmates

of

monasteries

to

marry,

he

was

somewhat taken aback and wrote to Spalatin: “O God, shall the Wittenbergers give wives to the monks! But they shall not force a wife
14 On November 1, 1521, in a letter to Nicholas Gerbel; Briefwechsel, 111, p. 240: *Mille
credas me Satanibus obiectum in bac otiosa solitudine. . . . Sacpius ego cado, sed sustentat
me rursus dextra Excelsi”

18 Bernhardi is known to us through his part in the Wittenberg disputation of 1516.

STORMS WITHIN AND WITHOUT

201

upon me.” ' He found very many grounds for criticizing the treatise of Karlstadt, especially its method of demonstration. Melanchthon, too, who opposed the monastic vows, had not hit upon the
right solution in Luther’s opinion. His own fermenting soul now
embraced the question, with no intention of dismissing it until the
right solution, or rather the least disquieting disposition of the duty of
the vows had been found. On August 3, he revealed the state of his
mind in a painful discussion with his friend Melanchthon: “You see
with what heat I burn [quantis urgeor @stibus], and yet I cannot
confirm any satisfactory conclusion except that I greatly desire to
support your efforts.”” 27

As was to be foreseen, however, he soon discovered what he sought.
The solution was destined to bring him what he desired, an influx of
male and female members of monastic Orders who had grown tired of
their vows. He resolved to liberate these “‘unfortunates” from the
“impure and damnable state of celibacy,” as he styles it, and to induct
them into the “paradise of matrimony.” '8 This solution also afforded
the advantage to make him independent of his rival Karlstadt, and furthermore, to enable him to watch over the “firstfruits of the spirit”
also in this matter. The point of departure was furnished by his idea
of evangelical liberty. “Whoever has taken a2 vow in a spirit opposed
to evangelical freedom”—thus he sets forth his saving idea—"“must
be set free, and his vow be anathema. Such, however, are all those

who have taken the vow in the search for salvation or justification.” 1? In this spirit all religious, including himself, had taken their
vows. This spirit was inseparable from the vow as long as good works
were regarded as efficacious; for the voluntary relinquishment of
freedom, offered at the throne of the Most High, is always connected

with the certain expectation, guaranteed by the Word of God, that
the sacrifice will assist in the attainment of salvation and justification,

through the merits of Jesus Christ whom the person who takes the
vow promises to follow in humility.
For the sake of advancing his new discovery, Luther first wrote

“theses” intended “for the bishops and deacons of the church of
Wittenberg.” 2 These were followed by his momentous work Ueber
186 On August 6, 1521; Briefwechsel, III, p. 215.

17 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 213.
18 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 83 sqq.

19 Letter to Melanchthon, op. cit. II, 84.

20 Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 323 sqq.; Opp. Lat. Var.,, IV, pp. 344 sqq.

202

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

die Ordensgeliibde, ein Urteil Martin Luthers (“On the Monastic
Vows: an Opinion of Martin Luther.”) 2! It abounds in misrepresentations of the monastic life and the Catholic teaching concerning
perfection, good works, and penance as well as in frivolous indecencies
and vulgar calumnies. The author prefaced the book with a dedicatory
letter to his father, in order to invest it with an attractive foil of
personal experience. His father, he writes, should not be angry at him

because, by entering a monastery, he had violated the grave commandment of obedience to parents. He now realized that his vow was
worthless, for God had released him from his fetters.
Desertion of the monasteries amid strife and tumult such as, for

instance, his friend Lang at Erfurt had proposed, Luther at that time
censured. Concerning himself, he announced his intention of adhering to his present mode of life. He wore the habit of his Order for
several years after his sojourn at the Wartburg.
2.

GHOSTS AND ILLUSIONS

Whilst Luther was engaged in the composition of his lastmentioned book, he announced to Spalatin: “I am suffering from
temptation, and out of temper; so don’t be offended. There is more
than one Satan contending with me. I am alone, and yet at times not
alone.” 22 He believed that he was visibly pursued by infernal powers
because of his praiseworthy discoveries. His intimate friend, the
physician Matthew Ratzeberger, quotes Luther as saying that, “Because he was so lonely, he was beset with ghosts and noisy spirits
which gave him much concern, and he drove them all away by prayer;
but did not wish to talk about it.” 23
Nevertheless Luther in his later Table Talks expressed his firm
conviction that he had encountered the visible Satan. Both Ratzeberger and Luther make mention of the devil’s assuming the form of

a dog.?* A big black bull-dog resisted him one night as he was about

to go to bed, and departed only after Luther had recited a verse of
21 Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 573—669; Opp. Lat. Var., VI, pp. 238—376; Denifle, in Luther
und Luthertum, has subjected the Latin text to a searching and extensive criticism. Cf.
Grisar, Luther, II, pp. 83

sqq. On the question

of

Christian perfection and

dual ideal of life fostered by Catholicism, see op. cit., II, 85, Note 3.
22 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1I, p. 8s.

28 Op. cit.,, Val. I, p. 82.
24 Op. cit.,, Vol. VI, p. 123; Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. 1, p. 440.

the alleged

GHOSTS AND ILLUSIONS

203

the Psalms. According to Luther’s own story, he seized the dog
and threw him out of the window. He states that there was no such
dog at the Wartburg. On another occasion he was disturbed at night

by a sack of hazel-nuts, locked in a chest, which by the power of the

evil one were thrown one after another against the rafters of his room,
while his bed was violently jolted. At the same time a rumbling noise

was heard on the staircase, as if barrels were being rolled down. And

yet, the staircase, as Luther convinced himself, was locked below with

bolts and chains.?® Thus, as Mathesius assures us, ‘‘he often heard the
rumbling noises of the evil spirit at night in his Patmos [i. e., at the

Wartburg].” It was frequently a struggle, he continues, like Christ’s,

when He was tempted in the desert. When he changed his quarters to

accommodate the wife of Hans Berlips, she heard such an ado in the
room that she fancied a thousand devils were in it.” Luther himself
reports that “at Eisenach” (i. e., probably at the Wartburg) he had
contemptuously called to the devil on such an occasion: “If you are
Christ’s master, so be it!” “I have learned by experience,” he says
elsewhere, “that ghosts go about affrightening people, preventing
them from sleeping and so making them ill.”
But he experienced not only tribulations, but also consolation and
encouragement from the world beyond.
“Ten years ago,” he said (1532) to his pupil Schlaginhaufen, “God

strengthened me in my struggles and writings through His angels.”
The period thus indicated probably refers to the months he spent
at the Wartburg. Perhaps the vision with which his pupils were acquainted also happened at this time. While he, engaged in the service
of the Word—thus the story runneth—was praying in his chamber,
the image of Christ bearing the five wounds, appeared to him in shining splendor. However, as he was in doubt, thinking it might be the
evil spirit, he said: “Begone, thou infamous devil,” whereat the image
forthwith disappeared. For some definite reason, Luther disliked to
indulge in such narratives, because the fanatics, his enemies, piqued
themselves on their enlightenment and revelations, instead of abiding

by the Biblical texts as propounded by Luther. He did not look
favorably upon communications from the other world. If, nevertheless, he exploited his own experiences in terms such as the follow26 Op. cit,, Vol. VI, p. 124. This and the next pages of my larger work also furnish the
evidence for the following incidents,

204

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

ing, their significance is all the more enhanced. “Ah, bah, spirits!”

he exclaims, “I too have seen spirits!”

He had other similar experiences both before and after his sojourn

at the Wartburg.

His mind was naturally receptive to such experiences. Even as a

monk, when he studied at night in the refectory preparing to become
a professor, he heard the devil rustling about in the wood-bin, and
again later on in his room at the monastery. “The devil,” he says,
“often had me by the hair of my head, yet was ever forced to let
me go.” He claims to have seen “grewsome ghosts and visions” from
time to time in the monastery, and “no one was able to comfortTM him.
More important is the following report. In the course of official business with Gregory Casel, a delegate of the reformed theologians of
Strasburg, in 1525, Luther assured him that, while in the monastery,

he “frequently had inward experience that the body of Christ is indeed in the Sacrament” (a dogma which the Zwinglians did not believe); that he had seen dreadful visions, also angels (se angelos
vidisse), so that he had been obliged to stop saying Mass.” “What do
the Strasburgers mean with their alleged ghost?” he asks. “Are they
alone in possession of it? But particularly, have they experienced the
terrors of death which I have been through (mortis horrorem expertus)?”

Luther’s visionary experiences cannot be doubted. They were gross
imaginings of preternatural annoyances and corroborations, misinterpretations of internal and external experiences which are well established, particularly for the period
he spent at the Wartburg. He
named the castle his Patmos, evidently because it was there that he,
like the Apostle John when in exile on the isle of Patmos, had
preternatural experiences. His extremely active imagination rendered him very susceptible to hallucinations and illusions, especially
when accompanied by precordialgia, a physical ailment from which
he frequently suffered, or by severe constipation, to which he was

also subject at times, and of which he complains at the Wartburg, or
when his nerves were overwrought in consequence of excessive lit~ erary labors.
The enlightenment which he imagined to have received, naturally
revolved about his divine vocation as herald of the new gospel. Thus
Luther, for all future time, received his spiritual baptism at his Patmos. The most precious “first-fruits of the spirit” (primitie spiritus,

“PECCA FORTITER”

20§

as he calls them), were allotted to him there.2® He says, apparently
in allusion to a mysterious event relative to his doctrine: “Under
threat of the curse of eternal wrath, I have been found worthy in no
manner to doubt these things” (fui dignus, cui sub wterne ire maledictione interminaretur, ne ullo modo de iis dubitarem) . How then,
in Luther’s imagination, was it possible that the devil should not have
opposed his election?
Legend has expanded this struggle with the devil. There is no certain warrant for the report of the apparition which in time has come
to be the most popular of the Wartburg tales. Luther nowhere says
that he hurled the ink-well at the devil, nor do his pupils mention
the incident. The famous spot on the wall is unattested, and its historicity is not confirmed by the fact that it has constantly been re-

touched, whenever the devotion of relic-hunters had gradually scraped
it off. Such spots, all originating from an ink-well which Luther
hurled at his satanic majesty, were formerly to be found also in other
places, e. g., in the rooms which Luther occupied in Wittenberg and
at the Koburg.?8
3. “PECCA FORTITER.” THE MASS

The famous expression, “Sin boldly, but believe more boldly
still,” 22 which Luther embodied in a letter written from the Wartburg to his friend Melanchthon, under date of August 1, 1521, is to
26 Op. cit., Vol. III, p. 116.

27 The passage is now to be found in Tischreden, Weimar ed., IV, No. 4852, among the
Table Talks of the Khumer collection, July, 1543, and is reproduced as a copy from
Luther’s Psalter. Luther wrote in almost identical terms to his friend Jonas, when the latter

was ill in 1540 and “in the greatest temptation,” introducing his letter as follows: “Contra

tentationem indignitatis mostrae sic respondendum est diabolo” (Weimar ed., I. c., note). He
wished to indicate to his frightened friend, how he quieted himself. The possible relation
to a single experience of Luther is made clear by the connection of the longer passage:
“Martinus Lutterus indignus sum, sed dignus fui creari a creatore meo, dignus fui redimi a

Filio Dei, dignus fui doceri a Filio Dei et Spiritu sancto, dignus fui, cui ministcrium wverbi
crederetur, dignus fui, qui pro eo tents paterer, dignus fui, qui in toto malis servarer,
dignus fui, cui praeciperetur ista credere, dignus fui, cui sub aelernae,” etc. Aurifaber thus
reproduced the conclusion: “[Yet I am worthy] that I ought by no means to doubt it, I
who have been severely threatened and enjoined by the wrath of God, His displeasure and
execration.” (Weim. ed., J. c.) Luther’s idea that God was leading him into hell, in order to
assure him of his salvation, seems to have arisen from an “experience” made by him at a

certain juncture of his life.

28 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 96.

'

29 Briefwechsel, 1II, p. 208; Grisar, o0p. cit, Vol. II, pp. 194 sqq.; M. Pribilla, article

*Pecca fortiter” in the Stimmen der Zcit, 1924, Vol. CVII, pp. 391 sqq.

206

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

be ascribed to his strong prepossession in favor of his theory of salvation by “faith alone.” This paradoxical aphorism was not, as has
frequently been assumed, 2 command to commit sin, against which
Luther always wrote and preached, but a very offensive hyperbolical
expression of the certitude, inculcated by him, that faith in a merciful God suffices to obtain pardon for all sins, provided that faith in
God is “boldly” asserted.

It seems that Melanchthon, who was spiritually weaker than Luther, was afflicted by the fear of sin. Luther, in his robust way, wished
to rid him of this fear and hence reminds him that he is “a preacher
of grace” who should not occupy his mind with imaginary sins, but
rejoice in Christ, the conqueror of sin; for sins are inevitable in this
life. Sin, he says in one of his strongest expressions, will “not tear us
away” from the pardoning mercy of the Lamb of God, “even if we
should have committed fornication and murder a thousand times in
one day.” Then he arrives at the notorious expression: “God does not
save those who merely fancy themselves sinners. Be a sinner, and sin
boldly, but believe more boldly still” (Esto peccator et pecca fortiter, sed fortius fide). In the context the phrase “‘sin boldly” conveys
a sinister impression, involving as it does, fundamentally, a strong selfcondemnation of the Lutheran theory of fiduciary faith and justification. In lieu of interior contrition, self-humiliation and the penitential spirit, justification is made dependent upon the presumptuous
apprehension of the merits of Christ, and sin loses its terrifying
character for the believer. Mohler rightly detects in these offensive
words “an evident mental derangement.” It is to be noted, however,
that Luther used similar language also on other occasions, for example,
abstracting from other instances at the beginning of his reformatory
career, in his letter to Spenlein (1518) and, shortly before his death in
his extraordinary letter of 1544 to Spalatin, who had become melancholy. The offensive “pecca fortiter” flows naturally from his whole
system of doctrine.??
After Melanchthon -had concluded his lectures on the Epistle to
Titus, the Gospel of St. Matthew, and the Epistle to the Romans, he

was transferred to the theological faculty of Wittenberg and there
not only continued his philological labors, but also undertook a the-

ological work, entitled Loci Communes, which was destined to be a
pillar for the support of the Lutheran doctrine. The work was com30 Cfr, Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, pp. 194 sqq.

“PECCA FORTITER”

57

pleted in December, 1521, and appeared in sixteen editions before
1525. The Latinity of the book is classical, but its theology clearly
betrays the lay-theologian completely enchanted by the new doc-

trine. The author pretends that, following in the path of Luther, he
must re-create the system of theology, after the greatest minds of
the centuries had supposedly labored in vain on it. Among other
things he teaches that all things happen of necessity (necessario eveniunt) in accordance with divine predestination, and that the human
will is not free. He gives a decidedly affirmative answer to the ques-

tion whether God is also the author of moral evil.3* Luther was delighted with the precious work, which mirrored forth himself. He
termed it an *“‘unconquered work,” which, in his opinion, deserved not

only immortality, but also to be received into the canon of the Bible.3?
Only gradually did Melanchthon recede from his harsh attitude in
subsequent editions of his work, and did not conceal his disapproval
of Luther’s denial of free will. Luther repeatedly invited him from

the Wartburg to take up preaching at Wittenberg. This the learned
layman, however, would never consent to do. He preferred the lecture
room and the serenity of home life. In August, 1520, he had married Catherine Krapp, the daughter of the burgomaster of Witten-

berg, and thus formed close social connexions with the inhabitants
of that city, which lasted to the end of his life.
The same spirit which impelled Luther to launch his attack upon

monasticism, also led him to attack the Sacrifice of the Mass. The
monastic state and the Mass he regarded as the most important pillars
of the papacy. In the letter in which he informs Melanchthon of his
passionate struggle with his vows, he also announces: “I shall never
again celebrate a private Mass.” Thomas Murner’s defense of the sacrificial character of the Mass (1520) did not convince Luther. In 1521,
under the influence of his “spiritual baptism” at the Wartburg,

Luther composed a Latin booklet On the Abolition of the Private

Mass, of which he published also a German translation under the title,
On the Misuse of the Mass.*®

This was the alleged justification of the fight upon the holy sacri-

fice which at that time commenced at Wittenberg.
81 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 239, 282 sq.
32 Op. cit., 11, 282.

ed., Opp. Lat. Var.,
33 Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 411 sqq.; German version, pp- 482 sqq.; Erl.
VI, pp. 115 sqq. and (German version) XXVIII, pp. 28 sqq.

208

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

Luther did not favor any overhasty discontinuation of the traditional liturgical celebrations. He knew that any attempt in this direction would meet with resistance on the part of the Electoral court.
Nevertheless, he did whatever he could to realize his designs against
the Mass in the university town. In the German treatise just quoted
he appealed to his “dear brethren, the Augustinians of Wittenberg,”
who had already discontinued saying Mass in their church and limited
themselves to preaching. He tells them that he rejoices in their work
and begs them to take up their position on the rock of firm conviction
and at the same time to spare the feelings of the weak. He established
his thesis by an appeal to the qualms of conscience which he experienced.
“Daily I feel how very difficult it is to lay aside scruples of long standing,

controlled by human laws. Oh, with what great pains and labors, and rcliance
upon Holy Writ, I have scarcely been able to justify my own conscience,
that I, one individual, have dared to oppose the pope and regard him as Antichrist, the bishops as his apostles, and the universities as his brothels! How

often has my heart been tantalized, how often has it punished me and reproached me with their only strongest argument: Are you alone wise? Can it

be supposed that all others have erred, and erred so long a time? What if
you should be mistaken and should lead many into error, who would be
eternally damned? Thus I felt until Christ fortified and confirmed me with
His only certain Word, so that now my heart is uneasy no longer, but re-

sists this argument of the papists, as a stony shore resists the waves, and
ridicules their threats and fury.” 34

This strong faith, which the mysterious “only certain Word of
Christ” supposedly conferred upon him, he wished to impart to his
brethren and all his readers in the course of his arguments against the

Mass.

4.

CONFUSION AT WITTENBERG. OTHER WRITINGS
COMPOSED BY

LUTHER DURING HIS SOJOURN AT THE WARTBURG

Luther’s attacks on the Mass were attended with greater success
at
Wittenberg than he had desired. Gabriel Zwilling (Didymu
s), a
young Augustinian, achieved prominence there as an enthusias
t for

the purified celebration of the Lord’s Supper without the Mass. Some
84 At the beginning of the German text, Vom Missbrauch
der Messe.

CONFUSION AT WITTENBERG

209

called him the new prophet and a second Luther. Melanchthon took
his part and missed none of Zwilling’s sermons. Karlstadt was no
less enthusiastic; he and a committee constituted of like-minded
zealots petitioned the Elector for “the speedy abolition of the abuse
of Masses in his principality.” It was the first application of the principle that ecclesiastical reforms were the affair of territorial rulers.
But the circumspect Elector on October 25 issued an order inhibiting
any acts which might result in dissension and uprisings.
When discontent nevertheless increased, Luther became alarmed
and formed a startling resolution. On December 3, he suddenly left
the Wartburg for a secret visit to Wittenberg, clad in his squire’s
costume. He remained there from December 3 to 11, in the company of Lis friends, for the sake of obtaining information on the state
of affairs, but eight days later he was back at the Wartburg.
He used the information thus acquired, which was partly unsatisfactory, in the composition of a tract, entitled A Sincere Exhortation
to all Christians to Guard against Rebellion.3®
It appears, he says, as if an insurrection is threatening, in which priests,
monks, bishops, and the whole clerical estate might be slain. By hearkening
to his words, however, such a general attack might yet be avoided. Christ

had reserved to Himself the punishment of papism, in order to slay Antichrist by the breath of His mouth. People should wait two years, then it
would be accomplished as a result of the gigantic and irresistible progress
of his Gospel, which was very evidently the work of God. “It is not our
work. . . . ’tis someone else who propels the wheel.”

In the sequel, he requests his followers to call themselves Christians, not
Lutherans. “Who is Luther? The doctrine is not mine; nor have I been
crucified for anyone.”

But above all: The weak and inadequately instructed must not be taken by
surprise or violence. The authorities only, and not “Herr Omnes” (i. e., the
masses) have the right and the duty to intervene against whatever is contrary
to the Gospel. The devil purposes to injure the evangelical doctrine by fomenting rebellion.

The extent of his illusion regarding the speedy collapse of the
kingdom of Antichrist may be inferred from the postil he at that
time composed for the second Sunday of Advent. According to the
astronomers, he says, a great constellation of planets was imminent

85 Werke, Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 676 sqq.; Erl. ed., XXII, pp. 44 sq.; written at the

beginning of 1522.

210

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

for the year 1524. The powers of heaven, according to the Sunday
Gospel, would be convulsed. God grant that it be the “Day of Judgment to which the signs certainly point.” 3¢
During his sojourn at the Wartburg Luther also completed his
remarkable interpretation of the Magnificat, which he dedicated to
the heir to the Saxon throne.?” It is a remarkable production on account of the note of sincere piety which the author, in the very
midst of a hostile and agitated campaign, sounds in these pages; remarkable, too, because of the author’s eulogy of the “Blessed Vir-

gin,” “the tender Mother of the Lord.” The commentary is largely
pervaded by the traditional devotion with which the Augustinian Order revered Mary, though it fails to do justice to her exalted virtues
or to her position as the advocate of Christendom before the throne
of God. Luther mainly extolled the faith of the Blessed Virgin,
as conceived in accordance with his new doctrine of justification.
He was aware of, and carefully took into consideration, the sentiments

of the prince to whom the work was dedicated, and who had a lively
attachment to many practices of the ancient religion which were still

appreciated by Luther. Later on, when the prince warmly supported

his person and his work, he learned.that the successor to the throne
regarded him as a profoundly pious man and a peaceful religious re-

former. Besides its religious note, Luther’s treatise on the Magnificat is
pacific in so far as the polemical ideas which it contains are veiled and
not clothed in his customary harsh language. Fundamentally, however,
it, too, is a controversial treatise, as is indicated by such superfluous ad-

monitions as that Mary is “no helping goddess,” even though Luther

does not as yet condemn the practice of praying for her intercession.3®

While the book is not, as has been asserted, a monument of the

author’s profound piety, nevertheless, one must marvel at the ideas in
which it abounds, the dexterity with which the style is varied, and the

adroitness with which the author adapts himself to his readers. For
the rest, Luther always believed in the virginity of Mary, even post

partum, as affirmed in the Apostles’ Creed, though afterwards he

denied her power of intercession, as well as that of the saints in general, resorting to many misinterpretations and combated, as extreme

and pagan, the extraordinary veneration which the Catholic Church
36 Kostlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, Vol. I, p. 478.
37 Weimar ed., VII, pp. 544 sq.; Erl. ed., XLV, pp. 212 sq.
88 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 237.

CONFUSION AT WITTENBERG

211

showed towards Mary. His prayer-book, which appeared in 1522, retained the Ave Maria side by side with the Pater Noster and the
Creed. As late as 1527 he even acknowledged the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of Mary, in conformity with the theological
traditions of the Augustinian Order.3?
At the beginning of 1522, Luther dedicated to the Pope his scornful tract Vom Abendfressen des allerbeiligsten Herrn des Papstes.t?
This crude production is a reference to the Bull Iz Caena Domini,
which was published annually on Maundy Thursday at Rome. This
document was a comprehensive condemnation of heresy, and it now
listed Luther among the condemned heretics. Luther derides the
pope as a drunkard who in his frenzy curses and swears and uses the
Latin of a “kitchen scullion.” He translates the solemn juridicial doc-

ument and accompanies it with coarse annotations. In the introduc-

tion he declares that “the Rhine is scarcely large enough to drown all
the scoundrels”—such as the “retailers of bulls, cardinals, legates,”
etc., besides archbishops, bishops, abbots, etc. Did such language serve
his previously mentioned purpose to quell violence and sedition?
It is a puzzle how Luther, during his short sojourn at the Wartburg, in addition to his other work, was able to translate the New
Testament from Greek into a German of undeniable excellence. He
practically completed this important task within the incredibly short
space of three months. We postpone an appreciation of his New Testament to a later page, where we shall deal with his rendition of the
Bible as a whole. As a literary document, it is truly monumental.*?
For the present we will consider only its polemical purpose. Luther
intended his Bible to be read by the masses, so that it might win followers to his new gospel. To accomplish this purpose he did not

scruple to alter the text in numerous places. The aggressive tendency
of the translator is emphasized by the wood-cuts which illustrate
the Apocalypse. There the woman of Babylon is repeatedly shown
crowned with the papal tiara; Catholic dignitaries, and even the Em-

peror, are depicted as rendering homage to the bearer of the cup of
sin and blasphemy; like Babylon, papal Rome collapses and is consumed by fire; the defenders of the papacy are depicted as dragons with
89 Op. cit.,, IV, 238 and soo sqq.

'

40 Werke, Weimar ed., VIII, pp. 6or saq.; Erl. ed., XXIV2, pp. 166 sqq. “Fressen” is a

contemptuous term used only of animals.
41 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 494 sqq.

:

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

212

seven heads, and so forth. These illustrations escaped observation until

quite recently. They are in complete harmony with the utterly abnormal apocalyptical frame of mind in which Luther was at that
time. In this respect, Luther’s celebrated German version of the New
Testament ranks with the polemical illustrations of the “Passionale
of Christ and Antichrist,” by which at the beginning of the Wartburg period he enlisted the aid of the graphic arts in the campaign
against religion.*?
§.

THE RETURN. VICTORY AT WITTENBERG

Whilst Luther was occupied with the translation of the Bible in
the solitude of the Wartburg, events happened at Wittenberg which
induced him to move back to the university town, in spite of many
and great dangers.

On December 3, students and citizens attacked certain priests who
intended to celebrate Mass in the parish church there. The monastery

of the Discalced Friars as well as a number of cathedral canons were

menaced. Worst of all, the tumultous Karlstadt, who cut such a sorry
figure at the disputation of Leipsic, set himself up as the leader of the
new movement with the intention of becoming not a dilatory, but a
consistent Luther. He announced that matrimony must be obligatory
for the clergy and that the reception of the Eucharist without the

chalice was not permissible. On Christmas he for the first time commemorated the Lord’s Supper without celebrating Mass, by adminis-

tering bread and wine to all who so desired, without previous confession. On January 19, he, as deacon of All Saints, solemnly took unto
himself a wife. The Augustinians who still remained at Wittenberg

removed every altar but one from their church and burned the images

of the saints as well as the holy oils. Karlstadt asserted that images
were prohibited by Holy Scripture (Ex. 20, 4) and denounced them
as idols. As a consequence, the sacred images and statues were cast
out of the various chyrches. The monk Zwilling conducted a similar

iconoclastic campaign in the towns and villages about Wittenberg.
He proscribed ecclesiastical vestments and preached his revolutionary

innovations clad in the characteristic attire of the students of that
time. Confessions were discontinued; the law of fasting was disre-

42 Grisar-Heege, Luthers Kampfbilder: 1. Das Passionale, 11. Der Bilderkampf
in der
deutschen Bibel, with 14 plates.

THE RETURN

213

garded; there was a movement to abolish all feast-days except Sundays; the religious consolations for the sick, prisoners and those about
to be executed fell into desuetude. In lieu of these it was proposed to
devote greater attention to the alleviation of temporal needs by the institution of a so-called community chest which was enriched by mass
stipends and other ecclesiastical funds. Karlstadt introduced a thoroughly shallow lay Christianity. It was his intention to promote a natural but spiritualistic religiosity in opposition to Luther’s massive

doctrine of the imputation of the merits of Christ.#® Like Luther he
believed that he was inspired from on high.
A new and dangerous element was injected into this movement
when, on December 27, the so-called prophets of Zwickau visited

Melanchthon at Wittenberg. They were: Nicholas Storch and Mark
Stiitbner, two cloth-weavers, who claimed to have received a direct
call from God to preach. They had been inducted by Thomas Miinzer into the prophetic life and into direct converse with God and
maintained that man is obliged to learn everything through the Spirit,
and to aspire to the most complete self-renunciation and apathy. Not
only was the Church to be reformed by one greater than Luther, but

the civil order, too, was to be altered, all priests were to be slain, and
all godless people extirpated. They attacked especially Luther’s doctrine of infant baptism and hence were called Anabaptists. If faith
alone makes the Sacrament efficacious, they contended against Luther,
then adults only can be baptized, since children are incapable of faith.
The inference cannot be denied.

Like many others, Melanchthon, who was deficient in intellectual
acumen, allowed himself to be taken in by these “‘prophets.” When
Luther heard of this he was greatly worried and tried to inspire
Melanchthon with distrust toward these fanatics.** His troubles were
increased in virtue of the tumultous innovations which were introduced in Wittenberg and environs. Luckily, Karlstadt did not make
common cause with the “prophets,” but the feeble efforts of the
Elector were impotent to arrest the innovations of Karlstadt.
These reforms were favored by a semblance of truth—if one
took the Lutheran position. Luther himself had set a precedent in
43 H. Barge, Karlstadt, Vol. I, p. 404.

44 Briefwechsel III, p. 273, 13th of January, 1522: “Neque enim Deus unquam aliquem
misit, nisi vel per hominem vocatum vel per signa declaratum. . . . Quaeras, num experti
sint spirituales angustias et mativitates divinas, mortes infernosque.” He says God Himself
speaks in the verse: “Contrivit ommia ossa mea” (Is. XXXVIII, 13.)

214

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

altering the divine services. The others were simply following his example. The enthusiasts of Zwickau were not only justified in their
opposition to his doctrine concerning baptism, but their private rev-

elations and theories of interior experience were essentially not far

removed from Luther’s contention that the Spirit alone must
guide man. Nor did they deviate very much from his view of supernatural revelation, although he himself was naturally unwilling to
grant that their strange and arbitrary conduct was the result of
visions. Strangely enough, he asked Melanchthon to tell the “prophets” of Zwickau that even raptures capable of transporting men
into the third heaven furnished no proof of their claims, but they

would have to work miracles and also to show that they had been
made partakers of the spiritual travails and the divine re-birth which
penetrated death and hell—that terrible regeneration which he believed to have experienced and which he maintained to be the standard by which to judge whether one were really and truly justified.
Writing of affairs at Wittenberg, the Elector Frederick said:
“Everything went wrong, everybody became perplexed, and no one
knew who was cook or cellarer.” 5 It was then that the imperial government finally issued a strict warning (June 20, 1522) to all the
bishops and to the above-mentioned Elector to ferret out and punish
those who disturbed the religious peace and violated ecclesiastical discipline. The bishops of Meissen and Merseburg indicated their intention to obey and Frederick caused representations to be made to

Luther.

:

What was decisive, however, was that Luther himself now resolved

to terminate the disorderly state of affairs by resuming his residence

at Wittenberg. Naturally he realized that his territorial lord might
be seriously embarrassed by the imperial authorities if he openly

permitted the outlaw to return to the university and sheltered him

in his territory. However, cognizant of the high esteem in which that
prince held him, and relying upon Frederick’s favorable attitude
towards the new religion, Luther ventured upon a course of action
which would otherwise have been foolhardy. Moreover, at the conclusion of his last letter, Frederick had practically put the decision
up to Luther by saying that he would leave everything to his dis45 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, 1, p. 495.

THE RETURN

-

cretion, since he was experienced in such important matters.*8 His

return was energetically requested by the authorities of the city of
Wittenberg as well as by the University, which had been induced to

take this step at the behest of Melanchthon, who was completely bewildered. Thus Luther started on the hazardous journey without
notifying the Elector.
He left the Wartburg on the morning of March 1, attired in his

squire’s costume, and rode towards Borna, south of Leipsic, by way of

Jena, where he met the Wittenberg student Kessler, a native of
Switzerland, with several companions, in. the Inn of the Bear. At
Borna he wrote a letter to the Elector, which Protestant historians
are wont to represent as a marvelous product of devout heroism.

Since he had received his Gospel not from man but from Heaven—thus he
writes in a vein of beguiling confidence—he would now return, in order
not to yield to the devil, who had caused the consternation at Wittenberg.

He realized that he had powerful opponents, such as Duke George of Saxony

(who had issued the most dire threats against Luther in a letter to the
Elector, his cousin); yet he was not afraid. Even if the state of affairs at

Leipsic, where George resided, were as bad as at Wittenberg, he would, nevertheless, proceed to that place, even if the menaces of vain George became
nine times more dire and if every inhabitant were nine times worse than he.
He was going to Wittenberg under a far higher protection than that afforded
him by his Elector. God was with him, and therefore he did not need the
protection of the ruler; indeed, he intended rather to protect Frederick than
be protected by him; for the Elector’s faith was still weak, whereas his
own was strong. He requests the prince, in the event that he be apprehended
or murdered, not to resist the authorities of the empire, for that would be
contrary to the will of God who had instituted them. The empire, he hopes,
would not expect the prince to become his [Luther’s] jailer. In conclusion
he rises to the height of a spiritualistic style: “If your grace would have the

faith, you would vision the majesty of God; but as you have not yet the
faith, you have seen nothing.”

This is Luther’s so-called “heroic letter” from Borna. It is undoubtedly the utterance of an incomparably courageous man; but it

is also the product of a mind which cannot be comprehended except
48 Briefwechsel, I1I, p. 295. The importance of these words is enhanced by the fact
that shortly before, at the end of February, x522, Luther had announced to the Elector his
early return to Wittenberg. Erl. ed., LIII, p. 183 (Briefwechsel, III, p. 291).

216

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

on the assumption that he was impelled by the fixed idea of being
divinely inspired. No man can write thus unless he pretends to be an
ambassador of God and who does not realize that his entire future is

at stake. The situation in which Luther found himself compelled him
to impress his territorial lord as forcefully as possible in order to as-

sure the success of his move. And he succeeded in doing this because
Frederick was a diplomat, sickly, and a Bible reader who favored
the Lutheran innovations. Luther, on the other hand, was simply

compelled to resume his abode at Wittenberg and to sever the chain
which bound him to the Wartburg, if he did not wish to see his lifework shattered. In no other way was he able to keep control of the
reins which, as he believed, had been entrusted to him by God.
Thus

considered, his resolution as well as the letter lose somewhat

of their

heroic character and enter into the sphere of tangible and practical
calculation. At all events, considering the edict of Worms and its
threats, his enterprise was a venture which might just as well
have led
to the fall of Luther’s work, as it actually did to its progress.
This re-

mains true, even if two other natural motives are taken into consider
ation. Luther’s long confinement was bound eventually to become
a sti-

fling burden to a man of his temperament—a burden to be shaken
at any price, even if ihe effort involved great danger. The

tor is the order issued by the imperial government to

off

second fac-

the Elector and

the bishops. It was bound to move Luther to form a strong
resolution
to settle the disturbances at Wittenberg. If he succeeded in
this, he

would be the man of the hour, and would prove himsel
f useful, if not
rehabilitated in the eyes of the empire. In the
opinion of many,
therefore, he would no longer be accounted a noxiou
s revolutionist,
as his opponents represented him to be. This
is offered in explanation
of the “heroic act” of Borna.

“Squire George” made his entry into
Wittenberg on March 6,
escorted by a number of knights who had
joined him on the way.
Kessler, the Swiss student, describes his exteri
or appearance as “quite
corpulent”; his bearing was erect, but
as he walked, he bent backward rather than forward; his head was
lifted high. Kessler particu-

larly observes his “deep-set black eyes and

twinkling like stars, so that it was not

In the following year, this striking

eyebrows, blinking and

comfortable to behold them.”

expression of Luther’s eyes is thus

described by the bishop of Kulm and Ermla

nd, John Dantiscus, who

THE RETURN

217

had seen and conversed with Luther at Wittenberg: “His eyes are
penetrating,” he says; “they have a certain sinister sparkle, such as
one finds from time to time in persons who are possessed by the
devil.” His features, he added, reminded one of the character of his
books, his conversation was excited and replete with risque allusions
and ridicule.*”
In addition to the letter which Luther had despatched from Borna,
the Elector was pleased to receive another communication from him
upon his arrival at Wittenberg. In this letter, which had been expressly requested by the Elector, Luther spoke of his return to Wittenberg, and the Elector intended to exhibit it in public, to enable
Luther to justify his step himself. The letter was actually read by the
Elector’s representative at the imperial court and by other important
persons.

On the following Sunday Luther, elated at his achievement, confidently ascended the pulpit of the town-church, whence for eight
successive days he delivered the most vehement sermons imaginable
against the prevalent frenzy. Owing to his powerful action, not to
say his hypnotic gifts, he was able to repel all opposition and to re-

store order. His chief thought was that the weak, i. e., those who had
not as yet attained to a full conviction of the value and freedom of
the Gospel, should not be perturbed by precipitous innovations. The

objects of a general amelioration had better be sought by gentle and
circumspect methods. By his prudence and the force of his eloquence,
he succeeded in gaining control of the situation and forcing Karlstadt with his associates into the background. The text of these famous sermons was subsequently revised by Aurifaber, who published

them. Luther made them the basis of his treatise “On the Reception
of the Sacrament under Both Forms,” which appeared soon after.*®

In this work he declares that charity was violated towards those who
were not of his party, “who belong to us and must be made to join us.”
A man is not bound to do what he has a right to do. Then, too, he (Luther)

should have been consulted, since the town council had conferred the office
of preaching in Wittenberg upon him. The Mass was to be abolished, but
not by violence. Marriage of the clergy, the monastic life, fasting, images in
47 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 357; cfr. Vol. III, p. 429; Vol. I, pp. 86, 279; Vol. II,

pp. 158 sq.

48 Weimar ed., Vol. X, II, pp. 11 sq.; Erlangen ed., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 285 sqq.

218

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

the churches, etc., were matters left free by God. Things would right them-

selves without ordinances and coercion, provided the Word of God entered
the hearts of men.
“While I slept and drank beer with my Philippo [Melanchthon] and with
Amsdorf in Wittenberg, the Word did so much to weaken the papacy as no
prince or emperor ever did before. I have done nothing; the Word has done

and achieved everything.”

Everyone who is canvinced he is right should make a determined use

of his liberty. If he is forbidden to eat meat on fast-days, he should straightway eat it; if the pope tries to compel him to remain in the monastic state,

he should discard the cowl. Then, contradicting himself, he states that the
use of the chalice by the laity is an ordinance of Christ, as it pertains to
the essence of the Eucharist, yet it is free and must not be made compulsory.
The chalice is to be given to those who desire it, but it is not to be forced

upon the congregation. Consequently, here too we have a twofold form of
administering the Sacrament with the inevitable danger of provoking a
cleavage among the faithful.

Luther’s attitude respecting the use of images was equally indefinite. The
images of saints, crucifixes, etc., are not to be abolished on their own
account, but only to serve God. Because of the harmful abuse to which

they have been put, they do not deserve to be retained. If people once find

out that images are worthless, they will disappear.

The old form of confession should be abolished and a voluntary confession
of sins substituted for it. He says that he himself had experienced the con-

solation and strength to be derived from this latter kind of confession,
without which the devil would have choked him to death long ago. “I am

well acquainted with him [the devil]; and he knows me. If you knew him,
you would not thus repudiate confession.” Luther, therefore, proposes to
retain confession on the strength of his own experience and by virtue of

his own authority, whereas the Catholic Church appeals to the authority
of Christ. He orders the penitent to confess to anyone whom he may select,

whereas the Church directs the penitent to an ordained priest. He directs
the penitent to confess for the sake of obtaining consolation, whereas
the
Church directs him for the sake of obtaining remission of his sins
through
the Sacrament of Penance. He does not acknowledge the sacrament
al seal
of confession which the Church imposes upon the priest.

But this is not the place to emphasize all the defects and contradic
tions
of the ecclesiastical system advocated by Luther as contrasted
with the laws

that prevailed in the ancient Church. They will suggest themselv

taneously to the thoughtful reader.

es spon-

:

In one particular Luther openly proclaims the necessity, and
at the same
time the impracticability of a measure proposed by himself.
For the practice
of auricular confession he would substitute a kind of ecclesiast
ical ban as

THE RETURN

219

an indispensable disciplinary measure. After exhortations have proved unavailing, “adulterers, usurers, robbers, and drunkards” should be excommunicated in the name of the congregation. “However,” he says, “I do not

venture to carry this out alone.” Owing to the internal defects of his religious system, his well-intentioned endeavors in this respect were never fully

successful, though stricter ecclesiastical discipline would have been precisely
the most necessary requirement after the tumultuous scenes witnessed at

Wittenberg.
On the whole, as even the most eminent among the Protestant biographers
of Luther acknowledges, one is “compelled to question whether the way
which Luther in these sermons prescribed for ecclesiastical reforms, was
actually fit to attain the object he had in view, namely, a Christian regimen
with purified regulations.” *° Indeed, the unlucky star of dissension between his basic demand of a false liberty and the need of unity and order

hovered visibly over the beginnings of his practical attempts at reform.

Karlstadt adapted himself grudgingly to the altered state of affairs,
but pursued his own course. He declared that learned studies were
useless and on one occasion, when a young theologian was being pro-

moted to the doctorate, publicly attacked the title of “Master” as
repugnant to the Word of Christ. He said he preferred to live in the
country as a peasant and to learn from peasants the interpretation of
Holy Writ as it had been imparted to them from on high. He chose to
call himself “Neighbor Andrew” and appeared in the grey garb of a
peasant. Having a propensity for false mysticism, he established relations with the seer and reformer, Thomas Miinzer.

The “prophets of Zwickau” had abandoned Wittenberg. In the
course of an interview with Mark Stiibner, Luther had challenged
him to prove his mission by a miraculous sign. It was a suggestion
which Stiibi:er could have cast back at Luther. Stiibner, however,
boldly declared that he would comply with the demand. Thereupon
Luther asserted that his God would prevent the gods of such false
prophets from performing any miracles. This ended the conference,

and Luther saw nothing more of the “prophets of Zwickau.” The
restless and fanatical Miinzer, on the other hand, endeavored to reapproach him and explained to him in a letter how, amid inward
fears, he had become assured that his was a true divine revelation. In
spreading his false ideas, therefore, he applied the same standard which
Luther claimed for himself, namely, the way of interior agony. His
49 Kostlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, sth ed., Vol. I, p. 507.

220

LUTHER AT THE WARTBURG

claim, however, did not impress Luther, whose practical sagacity
would not permit him to place the least trust in this over-excited
Communist.

One who entered the parish church of Wittenberg after Luther’s
victory, discovered that the same vestments were used for divine service as of yore, and heard the same old Latin hymns. The Host was
elevated and exhibited at the Consecration. In the eyes of the people
it was the same Mass as before, except that Luther omitted all prayers
which represented the sacred function as a sacrifice. The people were
intentionally kept in the dark on this point. “We cannot draw the
common people away from the Sacrament, and it will probably be
thus until the gospel is well understood.” 3 The rite of the celebration of the Mass he explained as “a purely external thing” and said
that the damnable words referring to the sacrifice could be omitted
all the more readily, since the ordinary Christian would not notice the
omission and hence there was no danger of scandal. The words in question, especially those of the canon, are pronounced almost inaudibly
in the popish Church.5!
5¢ Von beider Gestalt, das ander Teil.
51 Kostlin-Kawerau, op. cit, Vol. I, p. si1.

