CHAPTER I

LUTHER’S YOUTH

I. EISLEBEN AND MANSFELD

In the night of November 10-11, 1483, there was born to the miner
John Luther at Eisleben a son who was destined to achieve distinction.
The house in which Martin Luther was born was situated on the socalled Lange Strasse, in the southwestern part of the little city, which
was encircled by walls and towers. Even at the present day the somewhat deteriorated building is partially preserved, the upper story only
having been reconstructed because of a fire in 1689.

The house in which Martin first saw the light of day lay within the
limits of St. Peter’s parish. On the day succeeding his birth, the infant
was brought to the parish church. As it was the feast of St. Martin of
Tours, a bishop and monastic founder, the name Martin was given
to the child in baptism; and thus the saint who was commemorated on that day became his patron. In accordance with this custom,
the name of Martin was presumably likewise selected for Bucer, who
will be frequently mentioned as a subsequent helper of Luther. The
Sacrament which ushered the son of John Luther into the halls of Catholic Christianity was administered by the pastor, Bartholomew Rennebecher. The sacred rites were performed in the Gothic tower chapel
which is still preserved in its pristine condition. Upon entering the
chapel, one is vividly carried back to that hour. Profound thoughts are
aroused by the impression of the hallowed semi-darkness of the venerable walls and the sight of the precious side-altar, ornamented with
ancient statues of saints that look down solemnly upon the worshippers.
The local memorials of men frequently mentioned in history, which are
so sedulously sought to-day, possess an undoubted historic value. The
traces related to Luther’s person, were preserved with an uncommon
love by his friends and adherents. Tradition, however, has interwoven
errors with the truth. There is no historical warrant either for the baptismal font, which is pointed out in the chapel as Luther’s, or for the older superimposed part, despite its inscription which proclaims that
Martin was baptized here.^1

As one steps out of the chapel, which is surmounted by a tower, into
the church of St. Peter and contemplates its stately exterior, the Gothic
forms still recall the period of Luther’s youth. The church had been
gradually completed by 1513; but the tower, without its present
crown and the baptistery upon which its heavy pile is erected, dates
from 1474.

The friendly little city of Eisleben participated in the general zeal
for building churches which at that time proclaimed the religious devotion and Christian charity of the faithful in many parts of Germany. The large church which was dedicated to St. Andrew and in which Luther delivered his last sermons,
was rebuilt in the fifteenth century in conformity with an older plan and adorned with two tall,
pointed spires. In the year 1462, the church of St. Nicholas was completed. In that part of the town called the “new city,” built by Count
Albrecht von Mansfeld in 1511, a church was erected in honor of St.
Ann, the patroness of the mining industry, for the benefit of the
resident miners. The mining of copper ore, extracted from the near-by
hills, constituted even then, as it had for a long time previously thereto,
the chief industry of the city. The industry was very much promoted
by the counts of Mansfeld, who ruled Eisleben as the capital of their
county.

Martin’s father at the time of his son’s birth resided only temporarily in the beautifully situated and ambitious city.
He had settled with his family in this city some time before, in the hope of acquiring a better income.
Previously he had lived in Mohra, a village near Eisenach, whence the Luthers originated.
There he lived, a descendant of a race of peasants, engaged in husbandry.
In his Table Talks, Martin Luther says: “My great-grandfather, my grandfather,
and my father were real peasants.”^2 In another passage, after stating:
“I am the son of a peasant,” he adds, to indicate that he is not ashamed
of his descent: “Peasants have become kings and emperors.”^3 Indeed,
he ever remained conscious of the fact that something of the sturdiness of the Saxon country-folk inhered in him.

1^ Beschreibende Darstellung der alteren Bau- und Kunstdenkmaler der Provinz Sachsen, Heft XVIII: Mansfelder Gebirgskreis, von H. Grossler und A. Brinkmann (Halle, 1893), pP. 145.
2^ Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, Nr. 5574.
3^ 1bid., Nr. 6250: “Ego sum rustici filius,” etc,

The hardy population of Mohra counted among its number a
younger brother of John Luther, who also bore the name of John,
which had been given to him in honor of his god-father, regardless of
its being a repetition of the same name in the family. The first John
was referred to as the elder, or big John; his younger brother as the
younger, or little John. In the extant fragmentary court records of
Mansfeld, whither he had gone, the name of the younger brother occurs repeatedly.
According to these documents little John achieved
notoriety on account of certain brutal acts for which he was sentenced.
During one of his frequent visits to the tavern, he struck his neighbor’s
hand with a knife or inflicted bleeding gashes on his head. Once in the
course of a brawl he beat his opponent on the head with a tankard until
the blood flowed.^4 Perhaps it was this same irascible uncle of whom
James, an elder brother of Martin, states in the Table Talks of 1540,
that he trapped two Franciscan monks in a hole that was infested by
wolves.^5

It is related of Luther’s father that he was a serious-minded, severe,
and industrious man. At times, however, he drank to excess, so the
Table Talks assure us; and then, contrary to his habitual nature, he
was in high spirits and jovial. In this respect he differed, as Luther tells
us, from a nephew named Polner, who became vicious and dangerous
and compromised the Gospel in his frequent lapses from sobriety.^6
The father, according to Luther’s expression, was endowed with “a
robust, solid body.” As he practised hard manual labor, so too, Margaret his wife, was habituated to unremitting toil. From the scanty
notices which history has preserved, she appears to have been an industrious housewife. Besides Martin, Margarethad a number of other children who caused her sufficient cares and worry. Luther recalls that she
was wont to carry home on her back the wood that was needed for the
household. Margaret Luther, née Ziegler, was a native of Franconia.
There was no alien blood in her family, and certain early opponents
of Luther were unjustified in claiming to have discovered that
Luther’s ancestors originated in Slavic Bohemia, in order to connect
him with the country of the heretic Hus. Luther is a good Old-Ger-

4^ Zeitschrift des Harzvereins fir Geschichte und Altertumskunde, XXXIX (1906), art.
by W. Mollenberg, pp. 169 sqq. In adverting to the acts of violence the name “Hans
Luder” is frequently mentioned without distinction of person; so in Nrs. 7 and 8, where
the aggressor inflicts bloody blows upon two persons with a knife.
5^Tischreden, Weimar ed., IV, Nr. 4891.
6 1bid., Nr. sos0 of the year 1540: “Reliqui ebrii sunt laeti et suaves, ut pater meus,” etc.

man name. It is identical with Lothar (Luothar) and signifies: the
pure one. This fact is stressed occasionally by Luther in his Table
Talks. However, in the first years of his public appearance he spelled
his name Ludher or Luder. The form Luder or Lueder likewise appears in the family record. He complained that his enemies spelled the
name Lotter (Lotterbube), which signifies a vagrant scamp. In the
beginning of his revolt he used, for a time, the more euphonious
Greek term Eleutheros or Eleutherius (freeman, liberator). Later on
he jocosely derived his Christian name Martin from Mars, the valiant
god of war.^7

The Luthers had left Mohra and removed to Eisleben, because John
believed that the mining industry of the latter city would afford him a better subsistence. At Eisleben, according to his son, he
became a “metallicus,” or poor miner. The poor miner, however,
must soon have become conscious of the meagerness of his prospects
for advancement, for, in the year succeeding the birth of Martin,
towards the middle of 1484, he repaired with his family to Mansfeld,
the center of a flourishing mining industry.® The traveller of to-day,
who follows the road from Eisleben, passes friendly villages of frame
dwellings, conspicuous for their protruding upper story, a style of
building customary in that country. Continuing his journey, he soon
comes upon hills of dross and stones and smoking furnaces, which
even to-day form a characteristic picture of the city of Mansfeld,
lying between rising hills and green fields and woods. Upon his arrival, he is greeted by the ancient castle of the counts of Mansfeld,
majestically enthroned on the hill at his right. To his left and in the
immediate vicinity of the small hollow of the valley, lies the moderately sized city itself, situated on a rising plain. A broad street,
originally somewhat steep and at Luther’s time the only thoroughfare of the city, wends its way upward between the houses. At the
right there is an inconspicuous dwelling which is described as the
former residence of Luther’s parents. Only a small part of the old
homestead of the Luthers is preserved. The letters I. L. and the date
1530 are inscribed upon a semi-circular arch above the door. It is
reminiscent of James Luther, Martin’s elder brother, who, in the
T1bid., Nr. 4378; 1I, Nr. 1829. Briefwechsel 1, p. 19 of the year ryi4: “Flrater]
M[artinus] Luder; cf. pp. 44, 47, §3, 65 of the year 1516,
8 Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, Nr. 6250: “Darnach ist mein Vater nach Mansfelt gezogen
und daselbs ein Berghheuer worden. Daber bin ich.”
EISLEBEN AND MANSFELD $
year of the death of his father, thus perpetuated his property right.
For a long time the parents of Martin lived in poverty and anxiety
during their occupancy of this house.
Only gradually did the miner succeeed in improving his condition.
In speaking of his early youth, Martin Luther tells us that hard toil
was the lot of his parents. At a later date he narrates how he and two
other lads once collected sausages. It happened during a procession of
poor schoolboys singing in the streets. A burgher approached them,
offering to give them sausages, but as he addressed the children,
albeit in fun, in a rough tone of voice, they fled, not understanding
the well-meant joke. Thus, says Luther, men in their shortsightedness
and ignorance often fear God when He wishes to bestow benefits
upon them.®
He first attended school in Mansfeld. The school was situated somewhat higher up the street than his parental home, to the right of an
extended place similar to a plaza. It is partially preserved even to this
day. It was one of the elementary schools, known as Latin schools,
in which, according to an extensive custom, the students were introduced to the rudiments of Latin immediately after their first lessons
in reading and writing. Reading was learned by means of the catechism and the primer; the elements of Latin were acquired by the
recitation of the usual Latin prayers, such as the Pater Noster and
the Credo. These were arduous and toilsome years for young Martin.
The severity of the teachers and the vexatious declensions and conjugations lingered in his memory for many years. According to the
customs that obtained in the schools of those days, there was an
“asinus” (ass) which was wrapped around the lazy or ignorant
pupil. There was also among the pupils a “lupus” (wolf) appointed
to this office by the preceptor; it was his duty to record for punishment the omissions of his schoolmates. Punishment was inflicted
summarily at the end of the week. Luther states in his Table Talks
that he had once been disciplined with the rod fifteen times on a
certain forenoon. If true, this was due either to great lack of
diligence, or to stubbornness; or it was a penalty for misconduct of
which he had been guilty for a whole week.!® His later complaints
concerning the abuse of the rod in the schools of Mansfeld and in
9 1bid., I, Nr. 137: “cum caneremus ad colligenda farcimina” etc. Cf. ibid., III, Nr. 2936;
V, Nrs. s804, 5989aa.
10 1bid., V, Nr. ss71.
6 LUTHER’S YOUTH
the schools in general, are too specific to exculpate his teachers and
many of their colleagues in other places from the charge of excessive
severity. The age was strongly biased in favor of the rod. There
were laws against such excesses, but we have no guarantee that they
were observed.
Undoubtedly the stern discipline of the school contributed to
intimidate the character and depress the spirits of young Luther.
He retains one pleasant reminiscence of his school days, when he
gratefully mentions in his writings how an elder pupil, Nicholas
Semler, often carried him to school in his arms; for the ascent of the
street, especially when covered with ice and snow, was assuredly a
hardship. _
There were not many pleasant memories of his paternal home
which accompanied him in life. He did not experience the joyousness
of youth.
He avers, it is true, that his parents meant it well with him. His
father, ordinarily not communicative, with thoughts engrossed in
his labors, and his mother, who was similarly inclined, undoubtedly
told him about religion and its consolations; for they were loyal
Catholics. Thus, Martin heard from his father the edifying narrative
of the happy death of Count Giinther of Mansfeld (1475), made
beautiful by the great trust he placed in the redemptive merits of
the death of Christ.'! When, in 1§30, the dying John Luther, who
at the time espoused the religious party of his son, was asked
whether he confidently accepted the traditional teachings of salvation,
he replied with simplicity and bluntness: “I would in truth be a
knave did I not believe in them.” He had never been qualified
by his educational attainments to pass judgment on the orthodoxy
of the new doctrines. For the rest he respected the sacerdotal state
during Martin’s youth, though he freely indulged in criticisms of
it after his own blunt manner. On occasion, too, he expressed his
indignation at monasticism, perhaps on account of its obvious faults
or because it was the fashion of the age, when monasteries, their
possessions or mendicant practices were disliked by many.!?
Despite the high veneration in which the Church was held in his
11 M. Ratzeberger, Chronik, ed. by Neudecker (Jena, 1850), p. 42, who, however, disregarding other matters, distorts the affair in conformity with the idea of the new Gospel.
12 Tischreden, Weimar ed., III, Nr. 3556a: “Er bhat der Monche Schalkheit wobl erkannt?®
Thus Luther in 1537, undoubtedly because of his father’s opposition to his entering the
monastic state. In this connection it is also necessary to take into consideration Luther’s
EISLEBEN AND MANSFELD -
parental home, young Luther did not enjoy an excessive amount of
loving and solicitous religious care. The school and the Church had
to supply the deficit; and they did.
In general, the external discipline to which his parents subjected
him was too rigorous. This caused an aversion to the father on the
part of the son, which lasted for a long time, so that, as the latter
says, the father found it necessary to regain the lost affection of
his s6n. Unfortunately both father and mother, Luther subsequently
complains, could not distinguish between the disposition and ' the
spirit of their children and drove the son to despondency (usque ad
pusillanimitatem).’®* His own sad experience is reflected in his
admonition to all parents not to indulge in excessive severity,
but to “associate the apple with the rod” in the training of their
offspring. “My mother,” he says, “flogged me until I bled on account of a single nut.” ** It is surprising that Luther never in
later life mentions his mother with a friendly and warm feeling,
despite the frequency with which he recalls the days of his childhood and boyhood. The consoling picture of a mother’s love, which
accompanies most men on their journey through life, was apparently
denied him. Mother and father, it appears, often acted in anger.
The latter, for example, became “thoroughly enraged,” as Luther
himself says, when his son entered the monastery. Hence, there
is no exaggeration in the statement of Albert Freitag that there is
discernible in the boy Luther “a substratum of the melancholy which
pervaded his parental home”; !* nor in that of Friedrich von Bezold
who says that his “disposition was intimidated and wrapped in gloom”
early in life.'8
The pupils of the Mansfeld school were obliged to attend divine
service diligently. They worshipped in the parish church which
was dedicated to St. George and lay almost directly opposite
the school. This church originated in the thirteenth century. Rebuilt in the year 1497, when Luther was a boy, it still exhibits
the same form in which his eyes beheld it. A large statue of St.
disposition relative to his former vocation. The same is true of his expression concerning his
father in the Tischreden, Weimar ed., I, Nt. 881: “Semper fruit iniquus monasticae vitae.”
Cf. In Genesim, Weimar ed., XLIV, p. 411, and Ratzeberger, Chronik, p. 49.
18 T'ischreden, Weimar ed., III, Nr. 3566.
14 1bid.
15 Historische Zeitschrift, 1918, Heft 2, p. 264.
18 Geschichte der deutschen Reformation (Berlin, 1890), p. 248.
; l ”’/;L P L
8 LUTHER’S YOUTH
George, the gallant knight, in the act of slaying the dragon, graces
the beautiful Gothic portal. The windows are exquisitely decorated.
The interior is adorned with richly carved Gothic altars ornamented
with figures of the saints. An altar of St. Ann, patroness of miners, was
erectedin 1502.
The well-regulated divine services were bound to send more cheerful thoughts into the soul of the child and to touch his heart
with the supernatural destiny of man.
The singing of the congregation and of the boys’ choir was
especially treasured in the memory of Luther. They produced a
beneficial influence upon him. The boy was endowed with a high
‘voice. Docile and highly talented, he mastered the melody both according to form and spirit. He remained a life-long friend of sacred
music. We may picture him in imagination as he and the other
youthful choristers, vested in their white gowns, are led by the
cantor or the sub-cantor from school to church to participate in
the liturgical solemnities. The psalms, responsories, antiphons, the
Magnificat and the litanies still lived in him when he had attained
to a man’s estate. They were venerable melodies, handed down from
former ages, in the Latin text of which the singers were carefully
exercised by the cantor. Instruction in ecclesiastical chant constituted
an important part of the educational methods of the school; it was
adapted to their spiritual content as well as to their external
rendition. Besides the liturgical hymns there were the religious songs
of the people, such as the “fine hymn” at Pentecost, as Luther styles
it: “Nu bitten wir den Heiligen Geist,”” and the Easter hymn,
“Christ ist erstanden,” etc. “In the days of the papacy,” says Luther
at a later period of his career, “there were excellent songs.” That
Luther was the first to introduce congregational singing is a claim
not founded on fact, but on prejudice. He himself adequately refutes this prejudice. “Congregational singing flourished before the
Reformation.” *7
The boy learned and loved every phase of the regular ecclesiastical
life of Catholicism without meeting with any “reformatory” tendencies. The veneration of the Saints, reminiscent of the august communion of all the servants of God here on earth and in the realms
of Heaven, the reception of the Sacraments and attendance at the
holy Sacrifice of the Mass, the processions in the cemetery and to
17 Hans Preuss, Luthers Frommighkeit (Leipzig, 1917), p. §52.
EISLEBEN AND MANSFELD 9
the chapel of the departed, as well as those through the decorated
streets of the little city, the blessings and ceremonies of the Church
no less than the sermons of the clergy—everything made him feel
at home in the great spiritual house of God founded by Jesus Christ.
There is prejudice in the frequent assertion of non-Catholies that
there was “over-emphasis of good works in Roman piety and divine
service” which thus “suppressed pious impulses.” The congregation
and the boy Luther, on the contrary, knew “that men assembled
to praise and worship God”; “‘the heart was truly raised aloft and
joyousness replete with life was imparted to it.” '® Luther heard
of the Vicar of Christ, Innocent VIII (1484—-1492), who governed
all Christendom with spiritual power from his see at Rome. He
sympathetically sensed the danger with which the advancing forces
of Islam threatened the faithful, and which urged the latter to have
recourse to prayer, and perhaps his lips recited the prayer for deliverance from the Turkish menace at the sound of the “Turkish bell,”
a practice introduced about the.year 1456. He always treasured
the memory of St. George, the patron saint of his church, to whose
legendary story it was his delight to give a beautiful spiritual
significance. Of the public customs of his boyhood he boasted
that all games, such as dice and cards and even dances, had been
prohibited, whereas, in his old age, he saw them gain ground.'® It
isknown that the most widely read book of those days, which was
probably also perused by the boy Martin, who had a passion for
reading, was the excellent life of Christ written by the Carthusian,
Ludolph of Saxony (died 1377), a2 work firmly grounded upon
Christian doctrine and following in the attractive footsteps of St.
Bernard. Rivaling Ludolph’s book as a guide to the interior life
was Henry Seuse’s “Of Eternal Wisdom” and the “Imitation of
Christ” by the immortal Thomas 3 Kempis. All these writings were
permeated with genuine religiosity and the most solid piety, undiminished by even a taint of “reformatory” thought. The principal
spiritual companion of youth, however, was the catechism, concerning which Luther’s pupil, Mathesius, admits that God has “wonderfully retained it in the parish churches, for which we must thank
our God and the ancient schools.” 2°
18 Otto Scheel, Luthers Stellung zur bl. Schrift, 1, pp. 17, 19.
19 Tischreden, Weimar ed., IV, Nr. 126. ’
20 Mathesius, p. 16.
10 LUTHER’S YOUTH
According to the latter authority, young Luther learned his catechism “diligently and rapidly.” 2!
On the other hand, his boyhood days were unfortunately contaminated by the superstitions which prevailed in his parental home
and, in general, among his Saxon and German contemporaries. Incredible notions of the devil, expressed in the crassest of anecdotes,
haunted the minds of the people. Mysterious and credulous meanings were attached to ordinary phenomena of nature. This evil of
superstition was deeply rooted especially among the miners. Their
dangerous occupation in the mysterious bowels of the earth awakened
dismal phantasies. They feared that preternatural powers spied on
them with evil intent; then, too, they expected their assistance in
discovering rich ores; or, finally, as Luther’s speeches attest, they were
familiar with queer deceptions which they imputed to them. The
death of a younger brother in the parental home was attributed to
witchcraft.22 Many stories were told about Dame Hulda and her
strange apparitions. Luther learned that devils inhabit forests, lakes,
and streams, and use water-sprites to deceive men. He was told of
a lake in the neighborhood of Mansfeld which was filled with
captive devils who caused a storm whenever a stone was cast
into the water. In conformity with his traditions, Luther steadfastly maintained that the devil had carnal intercourse with women.
Changelings as well as goiters were caused by him. In his childhood,
he says, there were many witches in Saxony. One of these lived in
the vicinity of his father’s house, and his mother had to make every
possible effort to protect the family against her. It often happened
that the children screamed frantically when subjected to incantations.
The same witch, by means of her diabolical craft, brought on the
death of a clergyman who had opposed her activity, by means of
the ground over which he passed. In his youth Luther had seen many
persons whose sickness or death had been caused by witches. “When
I was a boy,” he says, “I was told of an old woman who had brought
misfortune upon a peace-loving husband and wife” against whom
the devil had attempted his insidious wiles in vain. The witch induced them to lay sharp knives under their pillows and influenced
them to believe that one party intended to murder the other; this
21 1bid.
22 Weimar ed., XL, I, p. 315: “Frater mibi occisus per veneficia”
MAGDEBURG AND EISENACH II
being so true, she averred, as the fact that they would discover
knives under their respective pillows. As a consequence, the husband
cut his wife’s throat. Thereupon the evil one appeared to the old
woman and, without approaching her, presented her with a pair
of shoes on a long pole. Why do you not approach more closely?
asked the witch, and the devil replied: Because you are more wicked
than I, you have succeeded wherein I failed.23
In his early sermons, delivered in 1516 and 1518, Luther mentions
the most superstitious things; indeed, strange ideas of this character
permeate his entire life. The excrescences of popular credulity, into
which he was introduced as a boy, were combated by the Church,
but without avail. Books that were held in high esteem even furthered
the abuse, as for instance the “Hexenhammer,” which was published
in 1487 by two Inquisitors. Ofttimes superstitious powers were
ignorantly ascribed to ecclesiastical practices, such as the sacramentals
and the veneration of the Saints. It is scarcely necessary to emphasize
that the rational use of the blessings of the Church and the veneration of the Saints were as little favorable to these errors as the
doctrinal teachings of the Church and of Sacred Scripture concerning
the devil. The popular imagination created its own worlds. What
was invisible was distorted and rendered visible; what was sacred
was subjected to profanation. Thus statues of St. Christopher that
were erected on the gates of the cities, and on the churches, even
in the churches, were made immensely large, because numerous prayer
books declared that whoever saw Christopher once a day, was protected against the evil spirits and sudden death. In his youth, these
giant statues were round about him. The legend of St. Christopher
made a lasting impression upon his mind, but, like that of St.
George and other legends, he interpreted it critically and in a spiritual sense. Nevertheless, his criticism of the legends did not dispel
his other superstitions.
2. MAGDEBURG AND EISENACH
About Easter, 1497, when Martin was fourteen years of age, his
parents sent him to Magdeburg to continue his studies. The eminent
talents which he displayed were: deserving of a better education than
that which Mansfeld offered. In the city on the Elbe there lived a
28 Tischreden, Weimar ed., II, Nr. 1429.
12 | LUTHER’S YOUTH
citizen of Mansfeld, Paul Mosshauer by name, who was an official at the
archiepiscopal curia. It appears that the poor boy had been recommended to him, for Martin ate his meals with him and, perhaps,
also lodged in his house. The range of his ideas was enlarged in that
ancient city, which even at that time was famed for its magnificent
cathedral and other splendid buildings. Martin had reason to be satisfied with the teaching and the treatment he received at school. He
was instructed by the Brethren of the Common Life,?* who undoubtedly furnished the major portion of his higher training.?®
In respect of educational and ecclesiastical matters, the road he
now trod was decidedly a fortunate and very fruitful one; for the
Brethren belonged to a community that was permeated by a profoundly religious spirit, whose efforts of reform within the Church
blossomed forth splendid results at that time. Originating in the
Netherlands through the efforts of Geert Groote, who distinguished
himself by his labors for the Church, the society of the Brethren
spread to Germany. They were representatives of the so-called
“devotio moderna,” a new conception of monastic piety more in
conformity with the requirements of the age, according to which,
in addition to prayers and begging, an active and timely efficacy
was to be cultivated in behalf of mankind. The Brethren particularly
devoted themselves to the education of the youth who attended the
existing schools, but they also erected schools of their own. Everywhere they laid special emphasis on devotional lectures, by means of
which they desired to foster the religious life of their pupils.2® Among
their students who became celebrated men were the pious Thomas 3
Kempis, the scholarly Gabriel Biel, the astronomer Nicholas Copernicus, and Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa. Thomas i Kempis, having
completed his studies under the guidance of the Brethren, became
a canon regular of the Order of St. Augustine in the monastery of
Agnetenberg near Zwolle, where he died in 1471, in the ninetysecond year of his life. His writings, above all his Imitation of Christ,
24 Undoubtedly their popular name (Loll Brothers) was derived from lulben, to sing
softly (in choir).
25 Briefwechsel, 11, p. 402, 15 June, 1522. Cf. E. Barnikol, Luther in Magdeburg (see note
26), Pp. 3 5qq., 54. Probably Luther attended the elementary instructions of the pensioners
of the Brethren.
28 Cf. Barnikol, "Die Briider vom gemeinsamen Leben,” in the Zeitschrift fir Theologie
und Kirche, Supplementary number, 1917; ib., “Das Magdeburger Briiderbaus,” in the Theolog. Arbeiten aus dem rhein.~wiss. Predigerverein, Series of 1922, pp. 8 sqq., and
“Luther in Magdeburg und das dortige Briiderbaus,” ib., series of 1917, Pp. I 8qq.
MAGDEBURG AND EISENACH 13
faithfully reflect the spirit which he imbibed in his youth from his
teachers, the Brethren of the Common Life. The Fraternity lived and
labored in complete harmony with the Church. It was absolutely
free from that aversion to the existing hierarchy which was formerly
ascribed to it by uninformed Protestant writers. Those so-called
“reformatory tendencies” which would qualify the Fraternity as a
kind of precursor of the Protestant Reformation cannot be attributed
to it in any sense. The constitutions, which were composed by Henry
of Ahaus, the founder of the German Brethren, are animated throughout by the spirit of ecclesiastical submission; and the documents which
we possess descriptive of the activities of the Brethren, confirm their
loyalty to the Church.??
Luther’s sojourn at Magdeburg lasted but a year, and few details
of it have been handed down to us. Mathesius, a pupil of Luther,
says: “The boy, like many a child of honest and wealthy parents,
begged for bread and cried out his panem propter Deum.” *® Luther
also confesses that he was “Partekenhengst” during his stay at Magdeburg and subsequently at Eisenach.?? This was a term of contempt
applied to scholars who collected small donations contributed for their
sustenance, by singing before the residences of the burghers or in other
ways. Mathesius is correct in his assertion that even sons of well-to-do
parents were sent out to engage in this humiliating practice of begging
so that they might learn humility and sympathy for the poor. In
Luther’s case it can hardly have been the impoverished condition of
his paternal home that compelled him to go begging.
‘Once, while sick with a fever in Magdeburg, he dragged himself to
the kitchen and, without stopping, drank the contents of a vessel of
fresh water. Thereupon he was seized with a profound slumber. When
he awoke, the fever had left him. This event is narrated by Luther’s
friend, the physician Ratzeberger, who was impressed by it on ac27 Paul Mestwerdt, Die Anfinge des Erasmus, Humanismus und der devotio moderna
(Vol. I of Studien zur Kultur und Geschichte der Reformation, ed. by the Verein fiir
Reformationsgeschichte), Leipzig, 1917. The author, on pp. 83 sqq., establishes proof of
the decidedly Catholic attitude of the Brethren. He calls (p. 86) the writings of Thomas
3 Kempis “a classical memorial of the piety of the adherents of the ‘devotio moderna’ ”—
O. Scheel I, p. 85: “The Brethren never: abandoned Catholicism. Their ‘modern’ devotion was erected entirely on the foundation of Catholic piety. This must, alas, be emphasized
to-day; for the Brethren have been made precursors of the Reformation.”
28 Ibid., p. 17.
29 Weimar ed., XXX, II, p. s576.
14 LUTHER’S YOUTH
count of its peculiar circumstances. He perceived that the robust
frame of the boy was endowed with endurance.®®
Luther tells us how deeply impressed he was by an edifying scene
he once witnessed in the streets of Magdeburg. A certain prince
William of Anhalt-Zerbst, who had become a Franciscan monk and
assumed the name of Lewis, passed him with a begger’s sack hanging
about him. The body of the prince had been reduced to a shadow
from fasting, night watches, and flagellations. A strapping brother
of the Order, a companion of his, more competent to carry the sack
and its burden, walked alongside of the staggering man, because the
latter, imbued with a spirit of penance, wished to bear the burden
alone.3! For thirty years the noble brother Lewis, a disciple of the
Saint of Assisi, had borne. the habit of his Order with honor until his
48th year, in 1504, when death relieved him of his burden. He performed the functions of a guardian in the houses of his Order in
Magdeburg and Halle. He was known for his kindness and charity,
no less than for the fearlessness with which he criticized the sins of
the mighty, for his delicate art of mediation in their quarrels, and for
his solicitude in behalf of the poor and oppressed. The establishment
of new houses of his Order, especially in Prussia, was attributed to
his successful labors.?? The rare example of renunciation of the world
which he displayed, was highly esteemed, especially because he was the
eldest child of his parents. Four sons of these parents embraced the religious state. The historian of the Reformation in the city of Zerbst
praises “the earnest and profoundly sincere piety” which characterized the princely family during the time prior to the religious schism.33
In his Magdeburg days Luther was filled with admiration for the man
whose countenance he was often privileged to see. He was yet free
from the animus that impelled him in later days to condemn him and
his monastic state.
If the lad had been given an opportunity to extend the time of his
sojourn at Magdeburg, there is no doubt but that the instructions
imparted at that place, and his association with the Brethren of the
80 Ratzeberger, pp. 41 sq.: “Er kreuchet auf Handen und Fiissen abwirts in die Kuchen,”
etc.
81 Weimar ed., 38, p. 105: “Er frug den Sack wie ein Esel, das er sich zur Erde kriimmen
mausste,” etc.
82 L. Lemmens, O.F.M., Aus ungedruckten Franziskanerbriefen des 16. Jabrbh. Reformationsgeschichtliche Studien, Heft 20 (1911), pp. 8 sqq.
88 H. Becker-Lindau, Reformationsgeschichte der Stadt Zerbst, in Mitteilungen des Vereins
fir Anbaltische Geschichte, Vol. XI, (Demsau, 1910), p. 250.
MAGDEBURG AND EISENACH I§
Common Life, would have affected his career most advantageously.
About Easter of the subsequent year (1498), however, he had to
transfer his residence to Eisenach, where he continued his studies at
the Latin school. It is possible that the internal crisis which overtook
the house of the Brethren at Magdeburg, contributed to this exchange.®* Relatives of his parents lived at Eisenach, with whom the
student was expected to establish connections. A brother-in-law, Conrad Hutter, sexton of the church of St. Nicholas, extended a cordial
welcometo the young student. In grateful remembrance Luther invited him in after years to attend the celebration of his first Mass.
At Eisenach, too, the industrious scholar experienced the directions
of a benevolent Providence and was further inducted into the spiritual life. At school and in the families of his acquaintances the religious
life of the town furnished him with an adequate spiritual cultivation
and a healthful interior development. In order to sustain himself, the
young beggar, who was endowed with the gift of song, continued to
solicit alms at the doors of the burghers, at least in the beginning of
his student days at Eisenach. Shortly afterwards he was supported by
a burgher named Henry Schalbe, designated as Heinricianus in the
old report, whose son he escorted to school.?® Later on a still better
home opened its doors to him. It was the residence of Kuntz Cotta.
The wife of this opulent native of Eisenach, who was descended from
an Italian family, was Ursula Schalbe, a charitable lady who is said
to have rescued the poor student from the streets, an act which many
later Protestant authors describe with touching sentimentality. Mathesius simply says that the pious matron invited him to partake of the
hospitality of her table, “because she cherished a strong affection for
the boy on account of his singing and fervent praying in church.” 3¢
Luther does not mention her name; only once does he refer to his
“hostess”” of Eisenach (a reference which might mean the wife of
Henry Schalbe), and avers that he learned from her the saying that
there is nothing on earth superior to the love of a woman for one so
fortunate as to win it.37 He entered this saying as a marginal note in
his translation of the Proverbs chap. 31, where Solomon sings the
praises of the virtuous and industrious housewife, the priceless treasure of her husband. At Eisenach the house where Frau Cotta is sup84 Barnikol, Das Magdeburger Briiderbaus (see note 26), p. 40.
85 Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, Nr. §5362.
86 Mathesius, p. 17. \
87 Weimar ed., XLIII, p. 692.
16 LUTHER’S YOUTH
posed to have lavished her benevolence upon Luther is still indicated
to the traveller. According to the better topographers of the town, the
residence of the Cottas is unknown.
Besides the Schalbes and the Cottas, who were devoted to the
Catholic faith, Luther became intimate with the vicar of the collegiate
church of St. Mary at Eisenach, John Braun, and his circle of friends.
Braun was versed in music and the humanities. With gratitude and
love Luther later on recalls his friendly and congenial intercourse with
him, in whose company music and song furnished many a happy and
inspiring hour.38 In a letter to Braun, written during his student
days at Erfurt, Luther recalls his sister Catherine, whose versatility
in singing induced him to refer to her jocosely as “Cantharina”
(the singer).® He also desired the presence of Braun at his first
Mass.
It is probable that Luther underwent his greatest spiritual experience in the small Franciscan monastery at the foot of the Wartburg,
which rises above Eisenach. The monastery was known as the Schalbian college, because it depended upon the Schalbe family for its endowment and juridical status. The Fathers at the college became his
dear friends, as is revealed by the correspondence concerning his first
Mass. He says that the excellent men of this monastery deserved well
of him.*® This monastery of discalced monks beneath the Wartburg
nurtured lively local remembrances of St. Elizabeth, the celebrated
landgravine of Thuringia. .
As the talented boy ascended the towering castle which commanded
the surrounding country, it is small wonder that he was animated by
lofty sentiments of veneration for the princess, who was the counterpart on 2 larger scale to the Magdeburg monk of princely descent.
There his ideas of the service of God and the significance of the things
of this world became enlarged. The example of the sainted princess,
who ministered with her own hands to the sick and indigent in the
hospital she herself had founded at Eisenach, was for him an effective
and beautiful illustration of applied Christianity in the most attractive form of humility, charity, and heroism. The beautiful popular
88 Briefwechsel, I, p. 1, letter to Braun, April 22, 1507, Cf. Degering (see following
note), p. 88.
39 H. Degering, Aus Luthers Friihzeit: Briefe aus dem Eisenacher und Erfurter Lutberkreise, 1497~1510, in the Zentralblatt fiir Bibliothekswesen, Vol. XXXIII (1916), Heft
3 and 4; Sonderdruck, p. 78.—Briefwechsel, XVII, p. 82,
40 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 3, to Braun, April 22, 1507.
MAGDEBURG AND EISENACH 17
legend of the miracle of the roses and the narrative of the cruel ban- ishment of Elizabeth and her children moved him more than the living
monuments of the days of German knighthood and the contests of
troubadours which were enclosed by the walls of the castle. Thence
he would cast his eyes upon Eisenach itself, a city of churches and replete with pious traditions of Elizabeth. The city was girdled by a
large wall, surmounted by many round, square and hexagonal towers,
and a moat filled with water. In the fifteenth century, the city with
its vast belt of walls, was no longer the residence of counts. Like the
one-time lively Wartburg, it had become a quiet place. The churches,
however, were the scenes of an active religious life. This was especially
true of the three parish churches, each one of which boasted a school.
The Romanesque church of St. Nicholas was located in the north of
the town, the church of Qur Lady in. the south. Another church,
dedicated to St. George, had been practically reconstructed in 1515.
In addition to the churches, several monasteries opened their chapels
to the faithful. There were about seventy priests in the town, of whom
some were not actively engaged in the ministrations of religion. All
too generous provision had been made for the religious requirements
of the population.
The school which Luther attended, the so-called trivium, was
situated in the immediate vicinity of the parish church of St. George.
John Trebonius—such was the humanist form of his name—was its
rector. “He was an imposing and a learned man and a poet,” in the
words of the physician Ratzeberger. Melanchthon reports that Luther
in later life praised his talents. He drilled his pupils thoroughly in
the Latin grammar of Donatus and in the syntax book of Alexander.
The *“asinus” and the “lupus” were not absent. It was customary to
study ecclesiastical as well as classical literature. In order to master
the church calendar, the students of Eisenach, as in many other places,
memorized the so-called “cisio-janus,” a composition in Latin hexameters which rendered the sequence of the feasts of the ecclesiastical
year by abbreviation of the introductory words. “Cisio” signified circumcisio, the feast of the Circumcision of Christ, the first feast
in January. Prosody and the preliminaries of the “art of oratory,” and
poetry were taught. The cantor played an important part. Besides
the cantor, there were a master and probably other preceptors, who
functioned under the rector, Trebonius. The latter manifested great
respect towards his pupils. When he entered the class-room, he was
18 LUTHER’S YOUTH
wont to remove his biretta until the pupils were seated, because, so he
said, there might be some among his scholars who were destined to
occupy stations of dignity, such as the office of burgomaster, chancellor, doctor or regent. Luther long maintained grateful and friendly
connections with the urbane Trebonius.
A prophet lived at that time in the larger Franciscan monastery of
Eisenach. The privilege of indulging in public prophecy was denied
to him, since the Brethren wisely confined the fantastic and dangerous
man to his cell. The name of this prophet was John Hilten. Luther
scarcely heard of him during his sojourn at Eisenach, but afterwards,
in 1529, he got Hilten to communicate his prophecies to him. He
then pretended to discover that his own opposition to the Pope had
been foretold by Hilten “at the time of his youth.”' By means of
astrological calculations and a bold applicationof passages of Daniel
and the Apocalypse to the evils of the age, against which he agitated
with excessive zeal, Hilten had discovered that Rome was destined to
fall about the year 1514. He never mentioned Luther. According to
his prognostications, the year 1651 would witness the end of the
world. Prophecies which actually came true, such as the advance of
the Turks, invested him with a certain reputation. Towards the close
of his life, at the end of the fifteenth century, Hilten is said by witnesses to have recanted his various theological errors, especially his
erroneous and invidious propositions concerning the monastic life,
which he uttered in his exaggerated enthusiasm for the Franciscan
rule. He died at peace with his Order and the Church. It is not true
that he was immured alive, as asserted by Ernest L. Enders.#2 In his
Apologia for the Augsburg Confession, Melanchthon erroneously
cites him as a papal witness to “evengelical truth.” It was even greater
perversion of the truth when Luther stated some years afterwards
that Hilten was murdered because he foretold that the execution of
John Hus “must be avenged; another shall come, whom the contemporaries will yet see.” 43
After a three years’ stay Luther left Fisenach. ‘The memory of the
town always remained dear to him. His father ordered him to continue his studies at the university of Erfurt in Thuringian Saxony.
Erfurt, with its struggling university, was the property of the arch41 Tischreden, Weimar ed., III, Nr. 3795, of the year 1538.
42 Briefwechsel, I, p. 198, in note 1 to Friedrich Myconius’s letter to Luther concerning
Hilten.
48 Tischreden, Weimar ed., III, Nr. 3795, of the year 1538.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 19
bishop of Mayence and subject to the protectorate of the Elector of
Saxony. John Luther was determined that Martin should become a
proficient jurist, one who could qualify for dignities and offices. In
order to achieve this object, Martin had first to complete what is now
called the curriculum of the liberal arts as a preparation for a professional course.
In the interim, John Luther had so improved his financial status
that he was able to support his son adequately during his academic
years. Whereas previously, according to Luther’s admission, his parents had been engaged in a bitter struggle for the necessities of life,
in later years the industrious father became the lessee of a number
of forges and pits. Mines at that time were operated under a leasehold, and often subleased. Moreover, as early as 1491, John had become a member of the “Council of Four” of the section of the city
in which he resided. He held the same office again in 1502. The members of the “Council of Four” were associated with the city council
in the government of their district. John’s repeated elections indicate
that he was regarded as an intelligent and a practical man who gradually improved his economic condition. In the spring of 1501, he sent
his promising son, now in his eighteenth year, to the university city on
the Gera.
3. LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT
Young Luther was next concerned with his reception into one of
the existing students’ inns of the university town. “Burses” or *“‘contubernia” were terms used to designate the homes to which all
students of the Alma Mater were obliged to belong, in virtue of
a time-honored prescription. Here they usually lived under the
supervision of one of the masters of the university. Aided by the
mastér, or by someone else, the students were directed in their scientific pursuits. By the payment of a small tuition fee they had board
and lodging in common. At first Luther resided in the “burse” known
as Porta Coeli, which he afterwards exchanged for that of St. George
in the parish of that name. Thus St. George, the patron saint of his
Mansfeld parish, accompanied him also on his road to knowledge.
In a verbose letter, the earliest preserved from his pen, Luther announced his residence at the Porta Coeli to his paternal friend Braun
at Eisenach. He signs “Martinus viropolitanus” (Martin of Mansfeld),
20 LUTHER’S YOUTH
and refers to himself as the “bothersome hair-splitter,”—an allusion,
no doubt, to his inclination to criticize.**
Erfurt at that time enjoyed an eminent reputation for learning.
Since the university of Prague, in consequence of the Hussite controversy and the consequent emigration of the Germans, had lost its
exalted position in the academic world, Erfurt was called the New
Prague. Its faculty of law in particular became celebrated. No less
distinguished were the members of the philosophical faculty and its
preparatory courses in the quadrivium of the liberal arts. In respect of
the study of philosophy, strictly speaking, Luther came under the influence of two excellent teachers, Jodocus Trutvetter and Bartholomew Arnoldi of Usingen. Prior to his admission to the higher
branches of learning, custom constrained him to complete the study
of grammar, rhetoric, and poetics. This preparatory discipline was indispensable for those students whose knowledge of these branches of
learning was incomplete. Martin, though he was well versed in these
branches, availed himself of this course in order to perfect his style,
as evidenced by the fluent Latinity of his later writings as well as his
early letters. He endeavored to catch the spirit of the classical authors.
Among the poets, he first familiarized himself with the writings of
an excellent neo-Latin poet, who was highly celebrated in his day,
Baptista Mantuanus, whose real name was Giovanni Spagnolo. At one
time general of the Carmelite Order, he was a pious and austere man,
who was later beatified by Leo XIII. In due course of time Luther
read Ovid’s Heroics or Love Epistles and the poems of Vergil. The
study of scholastic theology, he asserts, prevented him from reading
more of these authors. This statement, however, is not to be accepted
literally, for he found time to read the comedies of Plautus, and,
either at the same time or somewhat later, Horace, Juvenal, and Terence, from whom he was able to quote in his later years. Jerome Emser, his subsequent adversary, explained to him Reuchlin’s comedy of
“Sergius.” '
The so-called “minor logic” constituted a part of the subjectmatter of the first lectures in the faculty of liberal arts. The Old
and the New Logic, interpreted by the aid of Aristotle, was the next
44 Letter of September 5, rsor, with excuse for delay. First appearance of text in H.
Degering, Awus Luthers Friibzeit, in the Zentralblatt fiir Bibliothekswesen, Vol. XXXIII,
(1916), p. 78. Afterwards in Luther’s Briefwechsel, Vol. XVII, ed. by P. Flemming (Leipzig, 1920), p. 82, The letter is undoubtedly authentic.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 21
’ step in his studies. With the Stagirite as a guide, the student then
learned “natural philosophy, i. e., the physics of Aristotle, and read his
treatises on the soul and on spherical astronomy. Although the subjects of the ancient trivium still pertained to the faculty of arts, the
subjects of the quadrivium were freely treated. The lectures were delivered in the “burses” or in the auditorium of the so-called Old College. They were accompanied by constant exercises and disputations.
These “exercises and disputations” often commenced as early as six
in the morning; they stimulated industry, sharpened the wits, and
cultivated the faculty of oral expression.
In this respect, too, the faculty of arts of the University of Erfurt
revealed itself as a medium of a general academic training, well i adapted to the requirements of the age, preparing the student for
|
the higher branches of learning, theology, jurisprudence, or medicine.
Aristotle, who was celebrated almost universally as the Philosopher,
was the supreme pathfinder to scholarly independence.
The bachelor’s degree, the lowest academic honor, was the proximate aim of Luther. He obtained this degree as soon as possible, in the
autumn of 1502, by means of a severe test in the presence of five ’ examiners. As “baccalaureus of the liberal arts” he now wore the gown
- of his office according to the constitutions of the faculty, since he was
now a member of the teaching staff. This first academic distinction
prepared the way for the master’s degree. But, before he could achieve
this honor, it was necessary for him to devote himself to protracted
study. In the meantime he was obliged to assist beginners in the
studies he had completed. This was the rule of the university. A strict
law regulated the curriculum of studies and the scientific occupation
. of the teachers at the universities of that day.
Nevertheless, a certain freedom of life prevailed, and the students
found frequent opportunities for pleasantries and merriment.
Young Luther had experienced this at the very threshold of his
academic career, when he was obliged, like all newcomers, to take the
so-called “deposition” in order to become a full-fledged student in the
eyes of his associates. On this occasion the newcomer (Bearn) was compelled to masquerade with horns and elongated ears, and swine’s teeth
were attached to the corners of his mouth. Then, by means of a plane,
he was fashioned into the proper academic form. The merry procedure was crowned by a baptism with water or wine. Originally a certain spiritual significance had been attached to this ceremony: it was
22 LUTHER’S YOUTH
intended to hold up to the freshman the moral aims which he was to
pursue through the renunciation of his shortcomings. When Luther
was professor at Wittenberg in later years, he alluded to the symbolic
meaning of this “deposition.”
The life of the beneficiaries of the various “burses” was invested
with manifold privileges. Although the constitutions of some, e. g.,
the Porta Coeli, were strict and decisive in their religious and educational import, they were not always conscientiously observed. In comparison with the beginnings of the “burses,” there was possibly a lack
of zeal and vigilance in Luther’s student days. In some instances, the
frequentation of taverns was expressly permitted. The life of the
students at Erfurt must have been rather unrestrained. The relatively
large number of students (at that time an average of over 300 were
enrolled annually) leads us to expect excesses. In 1530 Luther says
that the University of Erfurt was “a place of dissolute living and an
ale-house,” in which subjects the students were interested in preference
to everything else.*® His added remark that “there were neither lecturers nor preachers” at this institution, is evidently to be characterized as
a polemical exaggeration directed against a Catholic university. For
there were deserving preachers at Erfurt, though they did not preach
the new Gospel; and there were also respectable professors, as he
himself attests in his reference to Trutvetter and Usingen. Nevertheless, the acrid judgment just cited reveals a modicum of evil experiences made at Erfurt. The city council in a measure harbored immorality by allowing prostitutes to live together upon the payment
of a tax, a custom which prevailed also in other cities. Even among
the clergy of Erfurt there were open infractions of chastity. It is
questionable, however, whether Luther meant Erfurt, when in his
Table Talks he said he knew a city where the mistresses of clergymen
were honored as Madame Deaconess, Madame Provost, Madame Cantor, etc.*® “Gossip may have seized upon many a story and embellished it with its own peculiar frivolity,” says Otto Scheel.4” When,
at a later period, Luther speaks of his own youth he states that the
clergy were not suspected of adultery and immorality, whereas, since
then, dissoluteness had constantly increased.*® At all events, Erfurt,
48 Tischreden, Weimar ed., II, Nr. 2719b.
48 Erlangen ed., LX, p. 280 (Chap. 27, Nr. 13j01).
47 Scheel, I, p. 136.
48 Opp. Exeg., IX, p. 260.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 23
during the student days of Luther, was a city whose inhabitants observed the moral law and were imbued with a profound religious
faith—a city replete with well-attended churches and numerous busy
monasteries whose bells never ceased ringing by day and by night.
The splendid church of Our Lady excelled all other churches.
Erected on a hill, it overlooked the entire city. The church of St.
Severus, which was situated next to it, still presents a magnificent
sight. A few decades before Luther used to visit this church, St. John
Capistran preached from the lower steps of the mighty terrace which
leads up to the hill, and stories were told of numerous conversions
and miraculous cures. In the year 1502, while Luther was present, the
city and the plaza witnessed the solemn procession of the jubilee
which was arranged under the auspices of the papal legate, Raymond
Peraudi of Gurk, accompanied by the general reception of the
Sacraments and a plenary indulgence. Like the jubilee indulgence
granted on a previous occasion, in 1488, that of 1502 was a source of
spiritual renovation for citizens and students. For 2 number of years
the voice of an Augustinian monk, John Genser (Jenser) von Paltz,
- the scholarly promoter of papal indulgences, resounded through the
spacious edifice. He was a profoundly pious man, endowed with
a powerful gift of speech. His associate, the Augustinian John von
Dorsten, rivaled him as a preacher of great popularity and impressive
forcefulness. Indeed, the Augustinian monastery excelled all others
in learning and practical activity. By means of their confraternities,
monasteries, and churches, these monks educated the faithful to a
more active religious life. Perhaps young Luther, the son of a miner,
may have experienced a sort of predilection for the confraternity of
St. Ann, the patroness of miners, which was directed by the Augustinians. We shall see that he supplicated St. Ann, when, during a
storm, he made his vow to enter a monastery.
But, until that time, he devoted two years to preparing himself for
the master’s degree. During this time he studied the logic of Aristotle,
certain questions of natural philosophy, mathematics in general, and
several minor branches of the old quadrivium; and, finally, moral
philosophy, politics, and metaphysics. All these subjects were learned
in the light of Aristotle and with the assistance of preceptors who
explained the writings of the Stagirite to the student.*®
49 Cf, Scheel, I, pp. 157sqq.; 170sqq., where the branches of study are set forth in
detail for the period before and after the baccalaureate.
24 LUTHER’S YOUTH
In its application of the Aristotelian philosophy, and in the study
of philosophy in general, the University of Erfurt claimed to pursue
a purified course, which at that time was designated as “modern.”
Trutvetter and Usingen, the principal teachers of Luther, were outspoken representatives of the via moderna, as were also their fellowinstructors. At other universities there were advocates of the new as
well as adherents of the old method. The old system favored the socalled’ philosophy of realism, whereas the new system betrayed
a nominalistic tendency. The latter originally derived its name
from the fact that it held that all universal concepts were mere
names (nomina.) The better class of Nominalists were strictly Catholic and avoided the dangers ordinarily attached to Nominalism. William of Ockham, the daring and skeptical “Doctor invincibilis” (died
at Munich in 1347), was the accepted leader of the Nominalist school.
But there were men like the learned and influential Gabriel Biel, as
well as the Erfurt professors mentioned above, who knew how to
avoid the reefs of Ockhamism.
Nominalism was a stage in the decline of Scholasticism. The heyday of Scholasticism was past; logical investigations and useless hairsplitting were in vogue. The barren subtleties of Terminism, so-called,
were an evil, though a very large and living stream of learning was
still flowing. The Scholastics of the thirteenth century, especially
Thomas of Aquin, who followed a moderate realism, had offered a
better foundation and, according to content and form, a better
school. St. Thomas had brought the Aristotelian philosophy into a
better organic union with Catholic truth. But his writings were not
properly utilized. We shall see how certain deficiencies of his Erfurt
training avenged themselves upon Luther. In many respects he
claimed to be a consistent Ockhamite; in some points he went beyond him, in others he abandoned him. It is important to bear in
mind, however, that he imbibed no reformatory ideas from his
teachers at Erfurt, but learned to combat the Nominalism of Ockham, wherever it deviated from true philosophy to the detriment of
dogma.,
The same attitude was maintained toward the authority of Aristotle. Although he reigned supreme in natural philosophy, the Catholic school contradicted his theses as far as they were in conflict with
the Christian faith. Divine revelation as a source of knowledge was
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 25
rightly regarded as inviolable against the objections of pagan philosophy. ‘
As yet Luther had not occupied himself with the study of the
Sacred Scriptures, with which he was acquainted only through the
widely spread excerpts of the postille or plenaria. These books, which
contained principally the pericopes of the Sunday gospels and epistles, as well as the very sententious so-called history-bibles, all composed in German, were in the hands of the clergy and laity.
Luther relates in his Table Talks how, while yet a student at Erfurt, he accidentally happened upon a complete Bible, and how the
Old Testament story of Anna, the mother of Samuel, made him
realize what inspiring narratives were contained in the historical
books of the Old Testament.®® The book with which he became acquainted on that occasion, was a volume of the university library.
He was uhable to read the whole Bible at the time, but he felt a lively
desire to make himself more familiar with the Sacred Scriptures.
But the great expense of a complete Bible in those days, when the
art of printing was in its infancy, permitted him to buy only a
postilla for his own use. He was amazed to discover many passages
which did not appear in the liturgy of the Church. According to
~ his own testimony, Luther was twenty years of age when he made
his first acquaintance with the complete Bible. This late discovery,
however, is not surprising. How many persons twenty years of age
may there have been, even among the highly educated, who never
had a complete Bible in their hands, and how many such individuals
might not be found to-day? There was no reason for Protestant
writers to adorn the story of this event with romantic embellishments and to assert that Luther then and there became the great
discoverer of the Bible, which, in the days that preceded his birth,
lay hidden under a bench and fastened to a chain. At most it was
fastened to a chain in this sense that it was secured for the sake
of safety and general utility. Even at the present day, all manuscripts in the Laurentian Library of Florence are secured by a chain.
Luther also informs us that once, when he and a companion
journeyed to Mansfeld, he injured his leg with the sword, which he,
‘as a bachelor, was wont to carry as a badge of his academic
80 Tischreden, Weimar ed., I, Nr. xxs;. ITI, Nr. 3767; 5, Nr. $346. I see no reason to
doubt this statement.
26 LUTHER’S YOUTH
status. The accident happened half a mile from Erfurt, and blood
flowed so profusely from the wound that he was in danger of .deat}.l.
He lay helpless on the ground, pressing the swelling wound Wlth.hls
hand until his companion had summoned a surgeon from the city,
who bandaged the wound. At death’s door, he tells us, he implo§'ed
the aid of the Mother of God. “Then would I have died, placing
full confidence in the helpof Mary.” In his room at Erfurt, the following night, the wound broke open. Feeling faint, he once more
invoked the Bl. Virgin Mary. While lying convalescent on his l?ed,
he sought distraction by learning to play the lute, an accomplishment which he ever afterwards cherished.?!
The playing of the lute proved a great advantage to him. It helped
him to dispel a natural tendency to melancholia, and also enabled
him to amuse and entertain his fellow-students. Crotus Rubeanus,
who in later years became a celebrated free-thinker, was a room-mate
of Luther’s. In a letter to the latter, dated April 28, 1520, Crotus
writes: “You were at one time the musician, you were the learned
philosopher in my contubernium.” 52 This statement reveals not only
Luther’s musical accomplishment, but also his zeal in the pursuit
of his studies. His success in philosophy was especially esteemed by
his fellow-students. Mathesius ascribed to him “a great earnestness
and special diligence” in his studies. “Though naturally an alert and
jovial young fellow,” he says, “yet he commenced his studies every
morning with prayer and a visit to the church.” Mathesius writes
this in his sermons on Luther in order to represent the piety of his
young companion as exemplary.53
Luther at this time had deeply-rooted Christian convictions as
well as loyalty to the clergy and the head of the Church. The antiecclesiastical ideas of Ockham were completely alien to him. According to his subsequent declarations, he dismissed, by means of
prayer and acts of faith, the objections to the teaching of the Church
which he occasionally met with in Ockham’s works. He heard bitter complaints about the condition of the Church, but they did not produce any impression upon him at the time. An old man from Meiningen, with whose son, who was also a student at Erfurt, Luther
was well acquainted, visited him during his illness and spoke to him
51 Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, Nr. 6428. Cf. I, Nr. 119.
52 Briefwechsel, 11, p. 391.
53 Mathesius, p. 19. The laudatory expression of Crotus also serves a partisan purpose.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 27
about a great change which was bound to come, since the present
state of affairs could not continue. When Luther complained of his
indisposition, the man consoled him, saying: “Do not feel aggrieved,
you will be a great man some day.” Luther mentions this conversation
in his Table Talks for the year 1532, and comments upon it as follows: “There I heard a prophet.” “I mean,” he adds, “that
the change of which the old man spoke, has taken place.” 5 Such
fanciful prophecies as those of the man of Meiningen and of Hilten
f’i‘ Eisenach, captivated him, not in his student days, but in later
ife.
During 1503 and 1504 his mind was absorbed by his efforts to
qualify himself for the attainment of the degree of master of arts.
At the beginning of 1505, he took the examination, which was
held around the feast of Epiphany. Among the seventeen students
who were examined, Luther took second honors. The examination
was followed by the solemn presentation of the insignia of the
master’s office, a brown biretta and a ring. Luther informs us that
on such occasions the new masters were publicly honored amid great
pomp. At eventide, accompanied by torch-bearers, they rode horseback through the city amid flourish of trumpets, the noisy acclamation of the populace, and the pleasures of Bacchus. They were
obliged to give a supper to the faculty, for which, characteristically
enough, the minimum and not the maximum number of participants
was designated.
In compliance with his father’s wishes, Luther, now a master of
arts, entered the faculty of law. He commenced to study in preparation for the secular career which his parents had chosen for him.
His father was even planning an advantageous marriage for him.
Formerly he addressed his son, while yet a bachelor, with the familiar
personal pronoun “du” (you) ; but henceforth he addressed him with
the honorary title “Thr” (you). With a great outlay he purchased
a Corpus Juris for the young law student.
The faculty of jurisprudence of the University of Erfurt in
those days had several professors of renown. Henning Gode in
particular was an excellent representative of Canon Law. We do
not know what lectures Luther attended during the first few
months, that is, the period whi¢h preceded his sudden entrance into
54 Tischreden, Weimar ed., I, Nr. 223; II, Nr. 1368, 2520. The visitor designated in
these passages probably was one and the same person.
28 LUTHER’S YOUTH
the monastery. He appears not to have been satisfied. It is fair to
assume that he had no inclination for the study of law. His subsequent strong condemnation of lawyers and their science justify the
inference of an early opposition. Then, too, his mind was so much
taken up with spiritual matters that he regarded the lectures on
law and the private studies which it entailed as too arid, of small
profit for heart and head. He did not suffer from a lack of emotional
capacity, as the near future soon revealed, but rather possessed a
superabundance of emotion, which was destined to become dangerous
for him.
Did he, perhaps, permit his philosophy of life to be influenced
at that time by the humanistic tendencies, whose history in Germany is so intimately connected with that of the University of
Erfurt? Some writers have assumed that a very strong influence
was exerted upon the impressionable youth by the neo-humanistic
movement which commenced at that time, and which was fostered
to excess by certain circles in Erfurt. It has been alleged that the
seeds of the future reformer were sown in Luther’s soul by the poets
and the untrammeled critics who had been alienated from the
Church. This view needs rectification. To a certain extent, young
Luther became surcharged with the ideas of his age, which sought
to imitate the classical form of the ancients without becoming enthusiastic over their pagan philosophy. The school of the trivium,
especially under Trebonius at Eisenach, formally directed his mind
into that channel. His first Latin essays manifest an affected, humanistically inspired style. Usingen and Trutvetter, his Erfurt
teachers of the “liberal arts,” although Scholastics and Nominalistic
philosophers, were neither unfamiliar with nor hostile to humanism.
They cultivated the sound old German humanism which, corresponding with that of the Middle Ages, was favored by the statutes
of the University. This was the kind of humanism of which they
endeavored to learn the forms and which fructified their ideas. It
was devoid of that corrosive and repulsive element which characterized the new humanism about to commence at Erfurt. The
movement with which Luther had affiliated himself, was marked
by a reverential attitude towards the Church. As yet he did not
study Greek, but he read the Latin classics with such enthusiasm that
it redounded to his great advantage in acquiring versatility of form
in Latin as well as in his German mother-tongue. When he entered
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 29
the monastery, he took with him the comedies of Plautus and the
poems of Vergil and disposed of all his other books to a bookseller.
It was only in proportion as his devotion to the Bible increased
that his predilection for humanism declined.
The neo-humanistic school did not assume shape at Erfurt until
after the doors of the monastery had closed behind Luther.’® He
was not in contact with its spirit, least of all with the anti-ecclesiastical endeavors of the canon Mutianus Rufus (Conrad) of Gotha,
the chief of the rising neo-humanism, who, since 1507, gradually
formed more intimate connections with the Erfurt humanists,
Eobanus Hessus, Crotus Rubeanus, John Lang, Peter and Henry
Eberbach, and others. From 1515 to 1520 the neo-humanists prevailed mightily at the University. In collaboration with the talented
and frivolous Crotus Rubeanus, they launched, in 1515, a hostile
publication against the Scholastics and the monks, which appeared
under the title of Epistolae Obscurorum Virorum. Luther’s contact
with Crotus, of which the latter afterwards boasted, was restricted
to their association in the burse of St. George. Both were members of
that small band of young friends (comsortium) who celebrated
Luther’s departure from the University and accompanied him to the
gates of the monastery.
Another humanist, George Spalatin, a native of Spalt, afterwards
Luther’s friend and most effective helper in the religious innovations,
was a student of Erfurt from 1498 to 1502, and returned thither
for a brief period in 1505 as a private tutor, when through the
mediation of Mutianus he obtained a position as teacher at the
monastery of Georgental. We have no authority for saying that this
man exerted a strong influence upon Luther during the days
he spent at Erfurt while yet a layman. But a strange tradition among
Catholics in Spalt, which originated there several decades later, attached itself to the name of Spalatin and other natives of Spalt who
associated with Luther in Erfurt.5® It is to the effect that Luther,
while a young monk, became enamored of the daughter of a widow
whose acquaintance he made in Spalatin’s home. This affair, so it was
alleged, was the beginning of his renunciation of the monastic life
and of the Catholic faith. It is not necessary to refute this fable.
The fall of the Augustinian friar is not to be attributed to a desire
55 Proof offered by Scheel I, pp. 223 sqq.
56 Grisar, Luther, 111, pp. 284 3qq.
30 LUTHER’S YOUTH
for matrimony, but to quite other causes. The story of Luther’s love
affair in Erfurt was probably circulated by George Ferber, a native
of Spalt.5"
In addition to the men mentioned above, Luther in his academic
years was associated with Caspar Schalbe, who was happy to procure
Luther’s intercession with the Elector of Saxony when accused of
a crime against morality before that sovereign in later years.®®
Certain declarations of his contemporaries are not favorable to
Luther’s student life. We refer to Jerome Emser of Dresden, who
came in contact with him at Erfurt, and to Jerome Dungersheim, a
professor at the university of Leipsic. Emser, who was secretary of the
Duke of Saxony, was engaged in open warfare with Luther in 1520
because of the latter’s writings against the Catholic Church. At that
time he wrote a letter to him containing personal reproaches which
is no longer preserved. Thereupon Luther upbraided him because
of his past life. Emser, indeed, was not innocent, according to his own
admission. In a counter-reply he says, among other things: “What
need was there for you to reproach me publicly with past mistakes,
most of which are inventions, because of a letter which tells the truth
about you? What do you, think is known to me of great derelictions
(flagitia) on your part?” He did not desire to mention these derelictions because it was not his purpose to repay evil for evil. “That
you also fell,”” he continues, “I believe to be attributable to the same
cause which effected my fall, namely, the cessation in our day of that
public morality which permits young men to live as they please,
unpunished, and to take all sorts of hbert1es.” 59 Luther never replied
to these reproaches.
The other witness is Dungersheim of Leipsic. He was a scholarly
man and zealous in behalf of the Church. In a printed pamphlet
directed against Luther he appeals directly to communications which,
as he avers, originated with one of the companions who escorted
him to the portals of the monastery and charges him with gross shortcomings in his student years. Besides these reproaches, he mentions,
in another polemical writing, “bad habits” which were attributed
to Luther and says it must have been due to the latter and the neglect
of prayer that Luther now maintained the impossibility for a monk
57 Ibid., p. 287.
58 1bid., 1, p. 7.
58 1bid., p. 27.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 31
to observe his vow of chastity.®® It must be remembered, however,
that at that time a strong sentiment prevailed against Luther at
Leipsic and many an unfavorable rumor was launched against him
which had no foundation in fact, as, for instance, his alleged petition
to the Holy See for permission to marry on the occasion of his
pilgrimage to Rome, in 1§10. But Dungersheim reéchoes the report of
a companion of Luther. It is possible that both witnesses relied upon
the communications of a comrade of Luther. As in the previous instance, so now Luther prefered to ignore the allegations made against
Luther afterwards denied that he suffered strong temptations
against chastity while he was a monk.®! In his bizarre manner he
repeatedly asserts that the devil reproached him not with moral
transgressions, but with his monastic virtues and the celebration of
Mass: these were the sins of his youth. On one occasion, however,
at the conclusion of his solemn profession of the Last Supper, he
concedes that he “spent his youth in a damnable manner and lost
it”; but he adds that the greatest sin he committed was the celebration of the Mass.%2 At another period of his later life, he once
more alludes to the sins of his youth, namely, the Mass “and this
or that youthful act”; that he often enjoyed internal “rest and good
days” until he was shaken with fright “of despair and the fear of
God’s wrath.” 88 Spiritually he often vacillated between extremes.
All depended, as the last quotation shows, on his ability to form
a strong conception of God’s mercy. Then he imagined—we speak of
his later years—that “it is only a temptation of Satan, the greatest
temptation, in fact, when he says: God hates sinners, and you are
a sinner.” “It is simply false that God hates sinners.” “If He hated
sinners, He would not have sacrificed His Son for them.” “We have
the forgiveness of sins,” etc. “However, many whom we do not
know must thus struggle in the world.” ¢* These violent and sudden
internal transitions are a sample of his temperament in later years.
80 1bid., pp. 26 sq. The two documents of Dungersheim of Ochsenfurt, quoted in this
passage, were combined by him with others in 1531 in a volume which bears the title:
Aliqgua Opuscula Magistri Hieronymi Dungersheim . . . contra Lutherum edita.
61 Grisar, Luther (original German ed.), 11, p. 1003.
62 Erlangen ed., XXX, p. 371; Grisar, I, p. 27.
63 Tischreden, Weimar ed., I, Nr. 141: *quod sacrificavi in missa, quod boc aut illud feci
adolescens.”
64 1bid.
32 LUTHER’S YOUTH
It is possible that his soul was afflicted with a similar tension, albeit
in a milder degree, already in his youth. 7
While a student at Erfurt, Luther maintained friendly and stimulating relations with his benefactors and friends at Eisenach.
Trebonius, his former teacher, inquires sympathetically of Luther’s
friend, the student Louis Han at Erfurt, concerning the welfare
and progress of “my Martin.” He sends him a message encouraging
him to strive after “wisdom and discipline.” The letter is one
of a recently published (1916) collection pertaining to the Eisenach
circle, with whom Trebonius and Luther’s benefactor at that place,
John Braun, were associated.®?
What is still more important, some of the letters of this collection
seem to be written by Luther himself. The Latin inscription of the
old collector over the Latin letters, which had been copied in many
instances without the address or name of the sender, reads very
definitely: “Twenty-four letters of Luther and his teachers and
friends of Eisenach and Erfurt.” 68 The letters were collected shortly
after 1507, supposedly at Eisenach, for the purpose of furnishing
models of style in epistolary correspondence for the use of schools.
Luther is the author of the verbose letter of the 27th or 28th of
April, 1507, in which he invites Trebonius to attend his first Mass,
and jocosely subscribes himself as “Martinus Lutherus Augustiniaster,” an attempted witticism meaning “an inferior Augustinian.” %7 Luther is also to be regarded as the author of the letter
to Braun, dated September §, 1501, in which he speaks of the commencement of his studies at Erfurt. It is probable that a third letter,
dated February 23, 1503, is likewise the product of his pen.®® The
editor of the collection refers to the spirit and mood of this letter
as a proof of Luther’s authorship. The unsigned document was addressed to a spiritual “benefactor and dearest friend.” Others have
rejected this assumption on the ground that the contents do not
quite agree with what we know of Luther the student (or rather with
what some pretend to know!). An eminent Protestant theologian,
however, has taken exception to this criticism by remarking that
the supposition that Luther must have been entirely free from the
65 Cf. note 44, supra; Degering, p. 90, letter of February 5, 1505. 86 Degering, p. 71.
87 Briefwechsel, XVII, p. 84; Nr. 16 of Degering’s collection.
68 Cf. text and note in Degering, p. 85.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 33
mistakes of his fellow-students has no “historical support.” ¢ The
recipient of the letter had praised the writer, who declines the compliment in stilted humanistic phraseology and says that he “is surfeited with human weakness, dereliction, and negligence in every
respect, interiorly and exteriorly,” “that habit rules like a second
nature” and “the times are evil, men are worse, their works replete
with wickedness. Prevented by gluttony and drunkenness, I have
hitherto [since my last letter?] neither written nor read anything
good; for, being placed in the midst of men, I have lived with men.
But as soon as I had torn myself away, I at once seized my pen,
in order to reply to you, most cherished father.” 7° In the course of
the letter, which does not offer anything very remarkable, the writer
requests the loan of a work by Nicholas of Lyra, which he had seen
in the library of his correspondent. Reference is probably made to
one of the religious tracts of Lyra, who was famous as a Biblical
commentator. The style of the letter, both in its humanistic composition and in various peculiarities, corresponds entirely with the two
other letters of the collection ascribed to Luther no less than with his
oldest previously known letters. The letter, moreover, harmonizes
with the above-mentioned accusations against the young student. It
must be noted, however, that a certain exaggeration attaching to
the form of his admissions is attributable to the style and character of the writer. In a letter written to Staupitz in 1519, and in
another written to Melanchthon in 1521, Luther also complains of his
gluttony, though the expression is not to be taken in its literal
sense.”! The vigorous words, in which the young student emphasizes
the decline of morality,are quite as energetic as those contained in
his first lectures, sermons and letters at the commencement of his
public career.
Taking all things into consideration, it cannot be denied that
young Luther was very probably the author of the letter with which
we are concerned. In a publication on Luther which appeared in
1917, at the time of the Luther jubilee, a certain Lutheran churchman
89 Hermann Jordan in Theologie der Gegenwart, 1917, pp. 158 sq.: “I regard Degering’s
assumption as not absolutely impossible; but it is as much a pure hypothesis lacking historical support as the assumption that Luther as a student must have been entirely free
from the intemperance of his comrades.”
70 “Crapulis et ebrietatibus impeditus bucusque minime quid bowi scripserim aut legerim,
quis constitutus cum bominibus conversabar cum hominibus.”
- 71 Grisar, Luther, 11, p. 87.
34 LUTHER’S YOUTH
writes: “Must we not believe that the man who was seized with fear
of sin in the monastery, who was personally acquainted with sin,
possessed a weak heart of profound depth and obscure corners, at
the sight of which he, at times, closed his eyes with trembling, but
into which he had descended with wide-open and burning eyes when
his evil hour was upon him? Why, else, should he have experienced
such biting qualms of conscience and such indescribable fear?” 72
For the rest Luther already in his youth suffered from a natural inclination towards melancholia. Nature, the severe discipline of his parental home, and the first school which he attended, produced a certain
depressed atmosphere in his soul. This never quite left him, although
it was frequently interrupted by intermittent periods of great mental
uplift and inspiration. Of his inclination to religious melancholia,
not to say despair, he wrote in 1§28, in a letter to one who suffered
from the same malady, that he “was not unacquainted with it since
his youth.” TM He regarded melancholia and despondency as the
inseparable portion of man. “Melancholia is born in us, the devil
fosters the spiritus tristitiae.” "* “From the days of my boyhood (a pueritia mea),” we read in the Table Talks, “Satan foresaw in me something of that which he must now suffer [in virtue of my Gospel].
Therefore he sought with incredible frenzy to injure and obstruct
me, so much so that I often asked myself in amazement: ‘Am I the
only one of all mortals whom he pursues?’ > 75
There is another indication that a very singular temperament
resided in the highly gifted soul of Luther. This must be taken into
consideration in judging the catastrophe which drove him precipitately into a monastery.
“Despairing of myself” (desperans de me ipso), he tells us, he
entered the monastery. 76 _
“Internal anxiety,” says a Protestant student of Luther, “or despair of himself led him into the monastery,”77 at the same time
emphasizing the “godliness” in which Luther learned to exercise him72G. Tolzien, Landessuperintendent, Martin Luther (Schwerin, 1917), p. 4. Tolzien
seems to be ignorant of the testimonies of Emser and Dungersheim. It is remarkable how
consistently they arc passed over by all, even scholarly, Protestant biographers of Luther. T8 Briefwechsel, VI, p. 173.
7 Weimar ed., VIII, p. §74.
75 Tischreden, Weimar ed., II, Nr. 12795 cf. Nr. 2342ab. '
70 Text from Rérers Handschriften, published by E. Kroker in the Archiv fiir Reforma- tionsgeschichte, Vol. V, (1908), p. 346.
77 Scheel, Martin Luther, 11, 2nd ed., p- 7.
LUTHER AS A STUDENT AT ERFURT 35
self already as a layman. However, godliness was not the sole driving
power which impelled young Luther. In view of his early religious
training it is hardly possible to dispute that the most pious impulses
often influenced him. Yet, despite his sentiment of despair, he was
subject to other factors, namely, in addition to his natural temperament, the well-founded premonition that the life of a layman was
accompanied by moral dangers with which he felt himself unable
to cope. In his subsequent attacks upon the monastic vow of chastity,
he applies a proverb which says: “Monks and clerics are mostly the
product of despair.” In the case of Luther, “despondency” connotes
chiefly a depressing sense of moral incompetence and the experienced inability to preserve chastity.?®
Another Protestant biographer speaks of the “psychical abnormality” of Luther in his youth, though, of course, his “especially tender
and impressionable conscience” is again emphasized.’® A third author
exaggerates when he says that the young man’s “nervous system was
unsettled from early youth,” and attributes this trouble to his excessively severe training.’ These statements indicate that we are
confronted with a complicated phenomonon. At all events, the existence of a somewhat disordered constitution, grounded in his very
soul, must be assumed. It was united to the depressing idea of guilt,
to which the ambitious youth appears often to have given free rein.
Both together, the disordered condition of his nerves and the strong
sense of guilt, may possibly explain the fear which, as we shall see,
pursued him in a most terrifying manner in the monastery, and
which reappeared ever and anon throughout his life. During his
monastic years, according to his own statements, he ever sought the
aid of a merciful God in his struggles amid great despair, without
being able to discover Him in the Catholic faith, and most Protestant
biographers hold that he was taken up with this quest even in
his student days, until he finally sailed into the haven of rest upon
the discovery of the new Gospel. This theory, as we shall show
later, is not correct. There is no proof whatever that Luther, prior to
the time when he entered the monastery, had a sense of insufficiency
of the Catholic faith and consequently struggled to find a merci78 Erlangen ed., XXI, p. 359. Cf. i8id., X, p. 400, and XIII, p. 130, where he adduces
the “proverb”: “Despair makes the monk,” applying it to the necessity of gaining a livelihood.
79 Bohmer, p. §o.
80 A, Hausrath, Luthers Leben, Vol. 1, p. 4.
36 LUTHER’S YOUTH
ful God. Let us quote here the words of another Protestant biographer, who, in this instance, judges correctly. Such a construction,
he says, “is neither supported by the facts known to us, nor has it
any probability.” “He [Luther] does not doubt the sufficiency of ways
and means. All things as yet co-exist ‘naively’ or succeed one another
in the normal Catholic rotation.” 81
The same author rightly rejects the favorite assumption that the
generality of mankind at that time was agitated by a knowledge
or feeling of the insufficiency of the Catholic way of life and
yearned for better things—which yearning was bound to captivate the frank soul of young Luther. “It is an erroneous
impression to hold that the human race, prior to the rise of Luther,
was moved by a passionate spiritual commotion and an impatient
quest after a more profound religious philosophy of life.” 82 Many
authors endeavored to discover in that age such a highly significant
preparation, a great prelude, as it were, to the Reformation. Leading authors have discussed “the lively consciousness of guilt which
inspired the people of that age, for the relief of which many thousands made great exertions,” but in vain, until Luther appeared as the liberator and prophet. Up to his advent “the mighty desire
for certitude in matters of salvation exhausted itself in a gra81 Scheel, I, p. 26. Scheel properly excludes from the juvenile period of Luther a strug- gle for a merciful God in the sense of most biographers of Luther and as a motive for his entrance into the monastery (pp. 242 sqq.). According to him, Luther’s resolution to be- come 2 monk was not “the natural result of a long struggle for God’s mercy” (p. 243). The hastily composed Latin and German transcript of 2 sermon delivered by Luther on February 1, 1534, furnished by Rérer, supplies us with the following reading: “Ego fui XV annis monachus et tamem munquam potui baptismo me comsolari. Ach quando vis semel fromm werden? donec fierem monachus. Non edebam, non vestiebar, friere, papa, antichristus treib mich da bin, qui abstulit baptismum” (Weimar ed., XXXVII, p. 661). In this entire passage Luther speaks of his monastic period; hence the words “donec fierem monachus” are to be attributed to a misconception of the copyist, as Scheel observes in his notes (Weimar ed., XXXVII, p. s19). While it is not permissible to translate these words by: “as long as I was a monk,” especially on account of the fierem, it is probable nevertheless that Luther intended to say something similar. The German text of the whole passage (Weimar ed, XXXVII, p. 661), which appears in the form of a sermon originally reported by Cruciger, concludes with the following words: “and by such thoughts I have been driven to embrace monasticism.” The text is a corruption without foundation in fact. Luther ap- parently had made his polemical assertion, that he arrived at his new doctrine in conse- quence of his struggle for a merciful God, so popular that his followers unconsciously ex- tended his struggles and doubts to the time prior to his entrance into the monastery, though he himself does not supply us with one word to that effect. 82K. Holl, Luther, Tibingen, 1923, p. 13.
ENTRANCE INTO THE MONASTERY 37
dation and excess of ecclesiastical performances without obtaining
any repose.” ® This is not the place to present a characterization
of the true ecclesiastical state of affairs. We are at a point in the
development of Luther, when he had had no opportunity to survey
the surrounding world. The student is still traveling his own road,
immersed in his studies and occupied with the affairs of his soul.
While he traveled this road, did the thought of embracing the
monastic state occasionally arise in his mind? Although he himself
is reticent about this matter, we may well believe that this thought
did engage his attention. For it is not likely that when his sudden
resolve was forced from him, the idea of the monastic life entered
his mind all at once. It is to be assumed psychologically that the
question of the monastic state had agitated him for some time,
even though he had not made a decision.* May not the wish to secure the salvation of his soul by becoming a monk have dawned on
him while he was in a melancholy frame of mind, overwhelmed
with a sense of weakness, vacillation and fear of going completely
astray on account of his youthful frivolity? His assertion that he
became a monk out of despair, points to such a strong impulse. His
early religious education, then the active religious life at Erfurt,
the example and activity of the religious Orders at the latter
place, e. g., the Carthusians, whose very strict life he had observed;
furthermore, his intercourse with pious preceptors, such as Usingen,
who eventually became an Augustinian; finally, reminiscences of
Magdeburg, such as that of the princely discalced monk and mendicant: all these things might have induced him to contemplate the
monastic life.
An event, however, was destined to happen which impelled him to
form a precipitous and premature resolution which was fraught
with momentous consequences.
4. LUTHER’S PRECIPITATE ENTRANCE INTO THE MONASTERY
On July 2, 1505, as the young man was returning from a visit
to his parents at Magdeburg, a violent storm overtook him not far
from Erfurt. As he was travelling alone near Stotternheim a bolt
of lightning struck in his immediate vicinity and prostrated him
83 F. von Bezold, Gesch. d. deutschen Reformation, Berlin, 1890, pp. 248, 242.
84 Thus H. Preuss in Theol. Literaturblatt (Leipsic, 1916), p. 94.
38 LUTHER’S YOUTH
to the ground. In consequence of his fall, as we know from a newly
discovered source,®® his foot sustained a severe injury (fracto propemodum pede). The realization of the danger of death forced this vow
from his lips: “Do thou help, St. Ann; I will become a monk.” 8¢ His
power of self-control deserted him almost completely. His friend
Jonas later would have it that, at the same time “a terrible manifestation from heaven” appeared to him, which the frightened Luther interpreted as a sign that he should become a monk.?” The idea of some
kind of a vision actually formed itself, and Luther himself probably
conceived it. For, immediately after the event he expressed the belief
that the thunder-clap was for him a call from Heaven to dedicate
himself to God in the religious life. He says that “intimidations from
heaven had called him to that state.” He advised his father that he had
received a heavenly call to the monastery. John Oldecop, a pupil of
the young monk, following Luther’s representation of the event, said
that Luther “entered the monastery in consequence of strange fears
and specters.” ,,
When his father, in opposition to Martin’s monastic vocation, used
the word “specter,” he merely meant, in the usage of those days, a
sudden excitement and imagination. Luther himself, after he had
deserted the monastery, said that he “made a forced vow while surrounded by death”; that force made him a monk; that he made
his vow amid “consternation”; and he adds: “I became a monk
against my will and desire.” 8 All the references in this passage pertain to the vow he had made in the course of a raging storm, but
not to the voluntary profession made at the close of his novitiate upon
twelve months’ mature reflection, in virtue of which he became a
monk.
After his return to Erfurt, having happily escaped the danger,
he decided to keep his vow at once and entered the Augustinian
monastery. His friends counseled against such a step. He himself
85 Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, Nr. 5373.
86 Jbid., IV, Nr. 4707.
87 Report of 1538, published by P. Tschackert in the Theol. Studien wund Kritiken
(1897), 578. The report is not reliable in several points.
88 Weim. ed., VIII, p. 573: “neque libens et cupiens fiebam monachus”. Cf. the words
to his father in the foreword to De wvotis on his vow during the thunder-storm: "spontaneum et voluntarium non erat” K. Zickendraht (“Was hat Luther im Juli 1505 bei
Stotternheim erlebt?” in the Zeitschr. fiir Kirchengeschichte, 1922, p. 142) correctly con- ceived the so-called apparition as the “influence of an electric disturbance on the ner-ous
system” and adduces analogous examples.
ENTRANCE INTO THE MONASTERY 39
desisted for a time and even admits that he regretted his vow. Nevertheless, he finally insisted upon keeping it and determined to carry it
out without consulting his parents.
The vow, made under pressure of overwhelming fear, cannot be
regarded as valid. It lacked the most necessary preliminary condition,
namely, freedom of the mind and deliberation. Any well-informed
spiritual adviser could have told him that. In view of reasonable doubrt,
a release from the vow could have been obtained.?? Luther, however,
was obstinately determined to follow the higher voice which he supposed had called him.
Considering the character of Luther, his qualities and natural
propensities, as they gradually developed after he had embraced the
religious life, we must conclude that this singular man was not made
for the monastery.
The monastic vocation presupposes qualifications entirely at variance with those possessed by Luther’s undisciplined nature, dominated
by imagination, and especially self-will. No one who is conversant
with the religious state and its requirements, will attribute to him
a genuine vocation to that state, which is one of renunciation,
obedience, and peaceful cohabitation with spiritual brethren. Nevertheless, he announced his immediate entrance to the prior, and
severed his connection with the burse. Fourteen days after the storm
he celebrated his departure in the company of his invited comrades
and other guests. He entertained them for the last time on his flute,
mingling plaintive strains with merry tunes. He said: “To-day you
still see me, but to-morrow you will see me no more.” On the following morning—it was the seventeenth of July, the feast of St.
Alexius—he went forth with courageous steps to the portals of the
monastery, accompanied by a few sorrowing friends. The prior received him with a joyful embrace. He was glad to be able to welcome
this promising young scholar into his community.
Luther was twenty-two years of age when the portals of the
monastery closed upon him, and a new future began for him within
its sacred precincts. Prior to his entrance and the commencement of his novitiate, he
was obliged by custom to spend a short time of probation in a
segregated room. Then he was invested with the habit and commenced
his probationary year. The habit of his Order consisted of a white
89 N. Paulus in Historisches Jabrbuch, 1921, pp. 85 sq.
- LUTHER’S YOUTH
gown with a white scapular, over which a black vestment was worn.
The scapular was furnished with a white cowl and a white shouldercape. The mantle, worn only on official occasions, was equipped with
a black cowl and a black shoulder-cape. The habit which Luther
wore about the house, was entirely white and had no cowl.
Internal peace was not to be the lot of the entrant: The very haste
with which he entered the monastery must have made its impression
upon the young monk; for the step he took signified a great and
life-long sacrifice. The fright which he had experienced during the
storm still agitated him. Amid flashes of lightning he beheld the
tribunal of an angry God who demanded an account of him. Moreover, the emotion of fear, which had lately been awakened in him,
tortured him. Melanchthon, supported by subsequent communications from him, says that terror had attacked Luther, “at first, and
mostly in the course of that year,” i.e., about the time he began his monastic career.®® The same authority, referring to the frequent attacks of terror (ferrores), in Luther’s subsequent life, writes: “As he told us, and as many know, he was often convulsed when he meditated on the wrath of God, or reflected upon striking examples of punishment inflicted by His justice. He was subject to such pro- found fear that he almost gave up the ghost.” ®1 This testimony is very valuable in explaining the condition of Luther’s soul at that time as well as afterwards.
When the lightning struck, he sustained a terrible nervous shock, which must have profoundly affected his future. This fact constrains us to reconsider his previous condition.
As we have seen, Luther was inclined to nervousness. 'The melan- cholia which always depressed him, was largely of a nervous kind. The thoughts of despondency which accompanied him, arose prin- cipally from an unhealthy psychological substratum. It appears that this constitutional evil was in part the result of hereditary oneration. The excitable temperament of his mother, who, on one occasion, chastised him until he bled on account of a nut, may have been transmitted to the son. From his father he had inherited not only tenacity of purpose, perseverance, an indefatigable zest for work, and energy in the pursuit of his aims, but also a conspicuous
90 Grisar, Luther, I, p. 17,
ENTRANCE INTO THE MONASTERY 41
irritability concerning his own ideas and contradictions on the part
of others.
It is related of his father that he struck a peasant dead in a
quarrel at Mohra, in the period preceding his removal to Eisleben
and thence to Mansfeld. He beat his adversary so violently with
a harness—although he had not intended to kill him—that the
man succumbed to the blow. The earliest mention of this homicide
is made not two hundred years after the event, as has been maintained,
but during the very life-time of Martin Luther; it is publicly averred
in print three times by George Witzel (Wicel), a well-informed
contemporary, who had formerly been a Lutheran, but afterwards,
from 1533 to 1538, functioned as a Catholic priest at Eisleben. The
charge of this polemical writer was never denied by Martin Luther.
Nor has one word in contradiction to it been uttered by any of his
contemporary friends and literary defenders. It was only at a later
~date that objections were voiced by Luther’s friends. According to
the Protestant historian, Johann Karl Seideman (1859), “the contention, which has ever and anon been revived, is decided by the
testimony of Wicel.” 92
When, furthermore, his father became “thoroughly enraged,” as
Luther himself puts it, at his son’s unexpected and hasty entrance
into the monastery; when the father, somewhat reconciled, attended
the first Mass of his son at Erfurt and became infuriated at his
son on account of his violated paternal right; and when, finally,
Martin Luther, mindful of his treatment at home, indulged in the
exaggerated expression that his parents had driven him into the
monastery by the bad treatment which they accorded him;®® then,
indeed, the character of John Luther appears sufficiently sanguine to favor the assumption that the son inherited this characteristic
from his father. The most recent Protestant biographer of Luther
describes the father as possessing a sanguinary temperament.
Under these conditions the terrible shock which Martin sustained
when the thunderbolt felled him to the ground, was bound to produce incurable results in one whose very constitution was neurotic.
Medical authorities tell us that, as a rule, neither time nor medical
skill can completely master the effects of such a nervous shock in
92 1bid., p. 16. F. Falk, Alte Zeugnisse iiber Luthers Vater und die Mohraer, in Hist.-
pol. Blatter, Vol. CXX (1897), pp. 415—425.
93 Erlangen, ed., LXI, p. 274 (=Tischreden, Weimar); Mathesius, Aufzeichnungen, p. 235.
42 LUTHER’S YOUTH
the case of neurotics. Recent experiences of those who sustained
shell-shock in the World War confirm this conclusion. The former
malady of nervous fear usually attained a degree that was beyond
control. And even where there was no predisposition, incurable
results often supervened. We are constrained, therefore, to regard
Luther, after the thunderbolt had driven him into the monastery,
as 2 monk who was afflicted with an extreme case of “nerves” and
deserved commiseration; as one who, even in his subsequent career,
often was sorely tried by suffering. We are able to comprehend his
complaints about the states of fear with which he was seized both
during his monastic life and after he had abandoned it, and which
he compares with the genuine death agony.
The Augustinians of Erfurt did not perceive this state of affairs.
They were too happy at the reception of a new member whose
talents for preaching and teaching were so promising. They attached
great importance to the reports of the candidate concerning his call
from Heaven. A scholarly member of the Order, John Nathin,
professor of theology in the studium generale of the Augustinians at
Erfurt, said at that time to the nuns at Miihlhausen that Luther
had entered the monastery like another Paul, miraculously converted by Christ.* In later years he spoke of the antagonist of the Church in a different language, saying, e. g., that “the spirit of apostasy had descended upon Luther,” i.e,, he had evolved his doctrine under the influence of the devil.?® There were other brethren of the Order who could not understand his peculiarities. They after- wards said superstitiously to John Cochlius, his celebrated opponent, that young Luther must have had intercourse with the devil. Others, again, regarded him as an epileptic.® His epileptic or seemingly epileptic attacks in the choir will receive more detailed attention in the sequel.
It did not take long before strange stories began to be told of Luther’s tragic resolve to enter the monastery. Thus Mathesius reports that the sudden death of a dear companion who had been stabbed, had frightened Luther quite as much as the thunderbolt, so that he entered the monastery startled at the wrath of God and the Last Judgment. In his brief reference to this matter, Melanchthon says
94 Grisar, Luther, I, p. 4, quoted from Dungersheim. 95 1bid., p. 17.
96 1bid., 1V, 353,
ENTRANCE INTO THE MONASTERY 43
that Luther at that time lost a dear friend, who perished in an
accident. According to Oldecop, that friend was “suffocated” by
lightning at his side. Ludwig von Seckendorff asserts in his History
of Lutheranism (1692), on the authority of Bavarus’ manuscripts
(1548 sqq.), that the name of Luther’s friend who died a sudden death
was Alexius or Alexis. It is probable, however, that the name was
formed from that of St. Alexius, on whose feastday Luther entered
the monastery. Of the other circumstances mentioned, only one appears to be based on certain evidence, namely, that a friend of Luther
died rather suddenly in 1505. The public records of Erfurt are silent
concerning any murder, although they note that one of the students -
who was to be promoted to the master’s degree with Luther became
seized of a severe sickness during the days of the examinations and
soon after passed away. Probably this event had a terrifying
effect upon Luther. Yet it is striking that Luther himself never makes
mention of this comrade whom death carried off so suddenly.®” He is
conscious only of his own danger during the storm and of his sudden
vow. Somewhat later an epidemic in Thuringia and Erfurt claimed
for its victims two students of Luther’s acquaintance. This fact did
not, however, influence his resolve. The pestilence spread even after
he had taken up his abode with the Augustinians. The tradition of
Luther’s resolution to become a monk has been correctly preserved
by Crotus Rubeanus, who had befriended Luther in his youth. He
writes on October 16, 1519, basing his statement on Luther’s own
words: “While you returned from your parents, a heavenly stroke
of lightning dashed you to the ground before the city of Erfurt like
another Paul, and drove you intoc the monastery of the Augustinians.” °8
97 Scheel, 1, p. 246.
98 Briefwechsel, 11, p. 208.
CHAPTER II
LUTHER'’S FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY
I. NOVITIATE, PROFESSION, FIRST MASS
The completion of a year’s novitiate was the first obligation in- cumbent on the new monk. During this probationary period he was
not permitted to study. Prayer, pious reading, labor and penances,
service in the choir, and mastering the rules and life of the Order occupied his time. For this purpose the novices were assigned to the direction of an elder monk. Luther was placed under an experienced novice-master whom he praised in later years as a wise and sympa- thetic religious. The master of novices explained to him the statutes of the Order, which John Staupitz, at that time superior of the entire congregation, had composed in 1504 on the basis of the old con- stitutions, adapted with wise discretion to the needs of the age. They were detailed and precise, but tolerated many dispensations in the monastic observance. The master of novices also saw to it that the young novice entrusted to his care diligently read the Bible. The statutes enjoined upon all the duty of “reading the Bible with fervor, to hear it read with devotion, and to learn it with assiduity.” To hold that the Sacred Scriptures were not in the hands of the faithful, even of the pious, in the days when Luther was a youth, is a wide-spread error. In the case of Luther himself, who afterwards rendered this statement current, there was not a day “on which the Word of the Scriptures was not perceived abundantly by ear and intellect. It came to be a permanent companion, a monitor and com- forter, a judge and a benefactor.” From that day a pronounced in- clination towards the Bible began to take hold of him. “Besides the Bible, the young novice joyfully saturated his mind with the writings of St. Bernard and St. Bonaventure, those pro- found and sympathetic teachers of the Middle Ages. His spiritual director understood how to comfort and guide the novice, who at
1 Scheel, M. Luther, 11, 2 ed., p. 2.
44
