CHAPTER III

STRIKING OUT ALONG NEW ROADS—THE INTERIOR
PROCESS

I. LUTHER’S FIRST BIBLICAL LECTURES—HIS MYSTICISM

The first lectures of the new professor of Biblical science were
delivered in the years 1513 to 1515 and dealt with the Psalms.
Those of his pupils who were monks and had to recite the Divine

Office in choir, were particularly interested in the Psalms. The interpretation offered them by Luther has been preserved in his
works. It is, however, not an explanation made in accordance with
our modern ideas, but rather a collection of allegorical and moral
sentences based upon the text, as was the custom in those days. Luther

justly abandoned this allegorical manner of interpretation in later
life. Non-Catholics have endeavored, without justification, to discover in these lectures the germs of his later teaching. His manner
of expression is often indefinite and elastic and generally more rhetorical than

theologically

correct.

His

teaching

on

justification,

grace, and free will, is, like his other doctrines, still fundamentally
Catholic, or at least can be so interpreted if the dogmatic teaching of the Church is properly understood. Still there are a few indications of the coming change. Take, for instance, his emphatic
assertion that Christ died for all men and his exaggerated opposition

to the doctrine of justification by means of good works.! In general
these lectures reveal talent, religious zeal, and fertile imagination—

qualities which must have charmed his auditors to an unusual degree.

Luther was very amiable and communicative towards his pupils.

His entire personality, the very gleam of his eye, exerted a certain
fascination over those who associated with him.

The young professor of Sacred Scripture displayed a pronounced
inclination towards mysticism. Mysticism had always been cultivated
1Cf. H. Boechmer in Allg. Evang.-Luth. Kirchenzeitung, 1924.
58

FIRST BIBLICAL LECTURES

59

to a certain extent in the religious orders of the Catholic Church.
The reading of Bonaventure had pointed Luther, even as a young
monk, to the pious union with God at which Mysticism aims. Toward
the close of his lectures on the Psalms, he became acquainted with

certain works on Mysticism which he imbibed with great avidity.

They were the sermons of Tauler and the tract “Theologia deutsch.”
They dominate his thoughts in 1515. Although these works were not
designed to do so, they helped to develop his unecclesiastical ideas.
His lively experience of the weakness of the human will induced him
to hearken readily to the mystical voices which spoke of the complete
relinquishment of man to God, even though he did not understand
them perfectly. His opposition to good works opened his mind to a
fallacious conception of the doctrines of those books of the mystical

life. It appeared to him that, by following such leaders, his internal
fears could be dispelled by a calm immersion in the Godhead.
John Tauler, an ornament of the Dominican Order (died in
1361), was a famous preacher in the pulpits of Strasburg. His

writings and sermons are filled with profound thoughts and have
a strong popular appeal. They abound in attractive imagery and
are replete with devotion. Tauler stands four-square on the basis of
Catholic teaching and the best scholastic theology. Two points in

his mystical admonitions found a special echo in Luther’s soul, namely,
the interior calmness with which God’s operations are to be received,

and the darkness which fills the souls of pious persons, of whom
he speaks consolingly. Luther, however, introduced his own erroneous
ideas into the teaching of Tauler. His demand that the soul be calmly
absorbed in God, Luther interpreted as complete passivity, yea, selfannihilation. And what Tauler says concerning trials arising from
the withdrawal of all religious joy, of all emotions of grace in the

dark night of the soul, he referred directly to his own morbid
attacks of fear, to which he endeavored to oppose a misconceived
quietism, a certain repose generated by despair. In brief, he tried to
transform all theology into what he called a theology of the Cross.
Misconstruing Tauler’s doctrine of perfection he would recognize
only the highest motives, namely, reasons of the greatest perfection

for himself as well as for others. Fear of divine punishment and hope

of divine reward were to be excluded.

These were extravagances which could not aid him, but, on the
contrary, involved great danger to his orthodoxy; in fact, constituted

6o

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

a serious aberration. But he trusted his new lights with the utmost
self-confidence. Writing of Tauler to his friend Lang at Erfurt, who
was also fascinated by the works of that mystic, Luther compares
him with contemporary and older theologians and says that while
Tauler was unknown to the Schoolmen, he offered more real theology
than the combined theological professors of all the universities.
The other mystical writer who interested him, was discovered by
Luther in a manuscript. He lived in the fourteenth century and was

the author of the “Theologia deutsch.” His name is unknown to us.
He was a priest at Frankfort on the Main. His work, which is a
didactic treatise on perfection, is Catholic, although not exempt from
obscurities. Luther esteemed it as a book of gold, particularly in
view of its praise of the sole domination of God in the soul that
suffers for Him. He edited this book, at first incompletely, in 1516,
then in its entirety, in 1518. It is remarkable that a book on Mysticism was his first publication. Soon he occupied himself with the
mystical writings of the so-called Dionysius the Areopagite, the father
of Mysticism, and with those of Gerard Groote, a more modern

author.
His style in those days, as also later on, reveals how profoundly

he was animated by the devout tone of these mystics. Thus, in
writing to George Leiffer, a fellow-monk at Erfurt, who was afflicted by persecutions and interior sufferings, he says (1516): “Do
not cast away thy little fragment of the Cross of Christ, but deposit
it as a sacrosanct relic in a golden shrine, namely, in a heart filled

with gentle charity. For even the hateful things which we experience, are priceless relics. True, they are not, like the wood of the
Cross, hallowed by contact with the body of the Lord, yet, in as far
as we embrace them out of love for His most loving heart and His
divine will, they are kissed and blessed beyond measure.” ® In
discussing the idea of self-annihilation under the guidance of
God, which was his favorite thought in these days, he shows that he
has gone astray. He says that man should not choose among good
works, but abandon himself to God’s inspiration, as the steed is
governed by the reins. In an address delivered in 1516 he declares:
“The man of God goeth, whithersoever God directs him as a rider.
He never knows whither he is headed; he is passive rather than ac2 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, p. 87.
3 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 68 (April 15, 1516); Grisar, Luther, I, 88.

RURAL VICAR

61

tive. He journeys ever onward, no matter what the condition of the

road, through water, mud, rain, snow, wind, etc. Thus are the men

of God who are led by the divine spirit.” * Such are the doctrines
which he opposed to those who became distasteful to him on account
or their insistence on good works and what he called their Pharisaical
observance of external practices.
On May 1, 1515, a chapter of the Augustinian congregation was

~ held at Gotha under the presidency of Staupitz. Luther preached the
sermon at the opening assembly. The theme which he selected
treated of the contrasts which must have developed in the monasteries of the congregation, namely, the “little saints” and their
calumnies against the monastic brethren who disagreed with them in
matters of discipline. With extreme acerbity, and employing the
crudest and most repulsive figures of speech, he scourged their criticism of others as inspired by love of scandal and malevolent detrac-

tion.® Apparently the majority of the brethren of his Order sided
with him, for they elected him to the office of rural vicar, ie.,

special superior of a number of monasteries as the representative of
Staupitz.

At stated times he visited the monasteries thus entrusted to him.
There were eleven of them, including Erfurt and Wittenberg. After
the middle of April, 1516, he made a visitation of the congregations

of the Order at Dresden, Neustadt on the Orla, Erfurt, Gotha,
Langensalza, and Nordhausen. The letters written by him during
his term of office as rural vicar, which normally lasted three years,
contain practical directions and admonitions concerning monastic
discipline and are, in part, quite edifying. Some of his visitations,
however, were conducted with such astonishing rapidity that no
fruitful results could be expected of them. Thus the visitation of

the monastery at Gotha occupied but one hour, that at Langensalza
two hours. “In these places,” he wrote to Lang, “the Lord will work
without us and direct the spiritual and temporal affairs in spite of
the devil.” ¢ At Neustadt he deposed the prior, Michael Dressel, without a hearing, because the brethren could not get along with him.
“T did this,” he informed Lang in confidence, “‘because I hoped to
rule there myself for the half-year.” 7
4 Grisar, Luther, VI

B Ibid., 1, pp. 69 sq.
B Ibid., 1, 65.
T1bid., 1, 266.

62

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

In a letter to the same friend he writes as follows about the engagements with which he was overwhelmed at that time: *I reaElly
ought to have two secretaries or chancellors. I do hardly anything
all day but write letters. . . . I am at the same time preacher to

the monastery, have to preach in the refectory, and am even ex-

pected to preach daily in the parish church. I am regent of the

studium [i. e., of the younger monks] and vicar, that is to say prior
eleven times over; I have to provide for the delivery of the fish from
the Leitzkau pond and to manage the litigation of the Herzberg
fellows [monks] at Torgau; I am lecturing on Paul, compiling

an exposition of the Psalter, and, as I said before, writing letters
most of the time. . . . It is seldom that I have time for the recitation of the Divine Office or to celebrate Mass, and then, too,
I have my peculiar temptations from the flesh, the world, and the
devil.” 8
2.

INTERIOR

STATE

The last sentence quoted above contains a remarkable declaration
about his spiritual condition and his compliance with his monastic
duties at that time. He seldom found time to recite the Divine Office
and to say Mass. It was his duty so to arrange his affairs as to
be able to comply with these obligations. The canonical hours were

strictly prescribed. Saying Mass is the central obligation of every
priest, especially if he is a member of a religious order. If Luther did not
know how to observe due moderation in his labors; if he was derelict
in the principal duties of the spiritual life; it was to be feared that

he would gradually drift away from the religious state, particularly
in view of the fact that he had adopted a false Mysticism which favored the relaxation of the rule. As rural vicar, it is probable that he

did not sustain among the brethren the good old spirit which the
zealous Proles had introduced into the society. Of the “temptations

of the flesh” which he mentions we learn nothing definite. He was

not yet in conflict with his vows. His wrestlings with the devil may
signify the fears and terrors to which he was subject.

He continued to be on good terms with his friend Staupitz, who
was interested in the young monk’s manifold activities. Staupitz also
81bid., I, p. 275, October 26, 1516.

INTERIOR STATE

&

posed as a mystic, and favored the spiritual tendency which Luther

followed. This talented and sociable man was very popular as a useful adviser in the homes of the rich and as an entertainer at table.
Whilst Luther could not accompany him on such errands, he enjoyed his company on monastic visitations. In July, 1515, he accompanied Staupitz to Eisleben, when the latter opened the new
Augustinian monastery at that place. As he walked in his sacerdotal
vestments in the procession through the city of his birth at the side
~of his vicar, who carried the Blessed Sacrament, Luther was suddenly
seized with unspeakable fright at the thought of the proximity of
Christ. On mentioning the incident to his superior afterwards, the
latter comforted him by saying: “Your thought is not Christ,” and
assuring him that Christ did not desire this fear.? At times, in con-

sequence either of a disordered affection of the heart or of overwork, he was so distressed that he could not eat or drink for a long
time. One day he was found seemingly dead in his cell, so completely
was he exhausted as a result of agitation and lack of food. His friend
Ratzeberger, a physician, mentions this incident, without, however,

indicating the exact time of its occurrence. Luther was relieved of
this pitiable condition by recourse to music, which always stimulated him. After he had regained his strength, he was able once more
to prosecute his labors. As a result of his suffering and worry he became very much emaciated.

Did Luther subject himself to extraordinary deeds of penance at

any period of his monastic life, as he frequently affirmed in his subsequent conflict with the papacy and monasticism, when he was impelled by polemical reasons to describe himself as the type of a
holy and mortified monk, one who could not find peace of mind
during his whole monastic career? Holding then that peace of mind
was simply impossible in the Catholic Church, he arbitrarily misrepresents monasticism, in order to exhibit in a most glaring manner

the alleged inherent impossibility of “papistic” ethics to produce the
assurance of God’s mercy. “I tormented my body by fasting, vigils,
and cold. . . . In the observance of these matters I was so precise
and superstitious, that I imposed more burdens upon my body than
it could bear without danger to health.” “If ever a monk got to
heaven by monkery, then I should have got there.” “I almost died
® Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. I, Nr. 137.

64

'

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

a-fasting, for often I took neither a drop of water nor a morsel
of food for three days.” 1°

Such exaggerated penitential exercises were prohibited by the
statutes of the congregation, which were distinguished for great discretion, and insisted upon proper moderation as a matter of strict

duty.

'

The above picture of singular holiness is produced not by early
witnesses, but by assertions which Luther made little by little at a

later period of life. The established facts contradict the legend. Perhaps his description is based partly on reminiscences of his distracted
days in the monastery, or on eccentric efforts to overcome his sombre
moods by means of a false piety. His greatest error, and the one

which most betrays him, is that he ascribes his fictitious asceticism
to all serious-minded members of his monastery, yea, of all monasteries. He would have it that all monks consumed themselves in
wailing and grief, wrestling for the peace of God, until he supplied
the remedy.! It is a rule of the most elementary criticism finally to

cut loose from the distorted presentation of the matter which has
maintained itself so tenaciously in Protestant biographies of Luther.

It may be admitted that, on the whole, Luther was a dutiful monk
for the greatest part of his monastic life. “When I was in the monastery,” he stated on one occasion, in 1535, “I was not like the rest
of men, the robbers, the unjust, the adulterous; but I observed chas-

tity, obedience, and poverty.” 12
Yet, after his transfer to Wittenberg, and in consequence of the

applause which was accorded to him there, the unpleasant traits of
his character, especially his positive insistence on always being in the
right, began to manifest themselves more and more disagreeably.
In his opinion, the Scholastic theologians, even the greatest among

them, were sophists. They were a herd of “swine theologians,” while

he was the enlightened pupil of St. Paul and St. Augustine.’® The
finer achievements of Scholasticism, especially those of its intellectual giant, Thomas of Aquin, were scarcely known to him. Could
his confused mysticism perhaps supplement his deficient knowledge
10 See the passages quoted by me in Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 191 sqq. A special chapter

in i

volume (pp. 187 sqq.) discusses “Luther’s Later Embellishment
of His Early Life” in the

various phases of its development.
11 Cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, pp. 157 sqq.

12 Op. cit., Vol. VI, pp. 233 sqq.

18 Op. cit,, Vol. 1, pp. 130 sqq.

OPPOSITION TO SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS

65

of Scholasticism? No, it only made him more self-conscious and
arbitrary in the sphere of theology. He gave free vent to his criticism

of highly respected ascetical writers. An example of his egotistical
excess in this respect is furnished by his glosses for the year 1515,

which he indited on the Psalter of Mary, a work of Mark of
Weida.!* In addition to these characteristics, there was his peculiar
irritability, which is strikingly exhibited in his correspondence during
1514. The theologians of Erfurt, led by Nathin, had reprovtd him for
taking the doctorate at Erfurt instead of at Wittenberg, since the

Erfurt school had claims on him as one of its own pupils. It is possible

that some harsh words were exchanged in regard to this matter. The
young professor in a letter addressed to the monastery at Erfurt says

that he had well nigh resolved to “pour out the entire vial of his
wrath and indignation upon Nathin and the whole monastery”
on account of their lies and mockery. They had received two shocking letters (litterae stupidae) from him, for which he now wants to
excuse himself, though his indignation “was only too well founded,”

especially since he now heard even worse things about Nathin and
his complaints against his (Luther’s) person. In the meantime, God
had willed his separation from the Erfurt monastery, etc.

The ill-feeling between Nathin and his Erfurt colleagues, on the
one hand, and Luther and his monastic partisans on the other, arose

from the controversy concerning the stricter observance of the rule

within the Order.

3. OPPOSITION TO SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS AND RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE

Contradictory conceptions of monastic life continued to be harbored in the Augustinian congregation even after the settlement of

the contention with regard to Staupitz’s plans of union.

Those brethren who treasured the ancient monastic discipline,

protected by papal privileges and exemptions, were accused of selfrighteous Pharisaism and of disobedience towards the General of the
order by Luther and his party. They were the “Little Saints” against
whom he had inveighed in his impetuous address at Gotha. In his
ns,
lectures and sermons he reproached, though often only in allusio
ne of

their “observantine” practices, their adherence to the doctri
however,

good works, and their want of charity. His invectives,
14 Theol. Studien u. Kritiken, 1917, pp. 815qq.

66

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

were launched with a bitterness which those concerned assuredly
did not merit, even though there might have been reasons for complaint. It may be said that the ancient and the modern wings opposed

each other in the Wittenberg monastery. Probably there was friction
also in the monastery at Erfurt, where Luther’s friend Lang was
prior, as well as in other monasteries of the congregation. Luther’s
monastery, however, was the center of the contention. The young
students of the Order brought with them their divergent views out
of the cloisters whence they came and they carried the new atmosphere of Wittenberg along with them when they left. Luther’s partisans at Wittenberg boasted that they were more closely attached to the

General of the Order at Rome than their opponents. The General,
they contended, was not in favor of the singularities of the Observantines.

At the commencement of his first series of lectures on the Psalms, Luther
delivered a sarcastic address on the obedience due to religious superiors.

“How many do we not find,” he says, “who believe they are very religious, and yet they are, if I may so express it, only men of an extremely
sanguine temperament (sanguinicissimiy and true Idumaeans [i. e., pagan-

minded].
state,

There are people who so revere and praise their monastic
their order, their Saints, and their institutions, that they cast a

shadow upon all others, not wishing to grant them their proper place.
In
a very unspiritual manner they are humble followers (observantes) of
their

fathers and boast of them. Oh, the frenzy that prevails in this day!
It has
almost come to this that every monastery repudiates the customs
of all
others and is imbued with such pride as to preclude taking over
or learning anything at all from another. That is the pride of Jews and
heretics,
with which we, unfortunate ones, are also encompassed,” etc.!’®
In the
addresses which he delivered in the monastery church he frequentl
y alludes
to the obstinate pride of the Jews and heretics, in condemnation
of those
members of his order or of other orders who adhered to the strict
observance. These “Observantines, exempted and privileged character
s”—thus he

fulminates in another’ lecture, are devoid of obedience, which
is the very
l to the
Church they are; in the interests of the rule, they were determine
d to

soul of good works. It will be seen—he continues—how detrimenta

insist upon exceptions; “but that is a light that comes from
the devil.” 16

15 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp, 497 sqq. Sanguinosissimi must
probably be read in lieu of

sanguinicissinii.

16.0p. cit., Vol. VI, p. 458,

OPPOSITION TO SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS

67

This was the contest which led the fiery monk to enter upon
doubtful ways. His opposition to the so-called doctrine of self-righteousness caused him to form a false conception of righteousness;
instead of attacking an. heretical error, he combated the true worth
of good works and the perfections of the monastic life.

Voluntary poverty, as practiced by the mendicants, was one of the
foundations of his Order. The inmates of monastic houses were to
live on alms according to the practice introduced by the great Saint
Francis of Assisi and for the benefactions received were to devote
themselves gratis to the spiritual needs of their fellowmen. Many

abuses, it is true, had attached themselves to the mendicant system:
self-interest, avarice, and worldly-mindedness infected the itinerant

mendicants. But in his explanation of the Psalms Luther attacks the

life of poverty per se: “O mendicants! O mendicants! O mendicants!”
he pathetically exclaims, “who can excuse you? . .. Look to it

yourselves,” etc. He places the practice of poverty in an unfavorable
light.!” In his criticism of the “self-righteousness” of his irksome
enemies, he confronts them with the righteousness of the spirit that
cometh from Christ. These people, whom he believed it his duty to
expose, were guilty, in his opinion, of a Pharisaical denial of the true

righteousness of Christ. His righteousness, and not our good works,

effect our salvation; works generate a fleshly sense and boastfulness.
These thought-processes evince how false mysticism, unclear theological notions, a darkening of the monastic spirit, and passionate

obstinacy conspired in Luther’s mind.

In the years 1515 and 1516, the phalanx of the self-righteous, the justi-

tiarii, as he styles them, again constitute the object of his attacks. There
is Christ, the hen with its protecting wings, which he must defend against

the vultures that pounce upon us in their self-righteousness. These enemies
of the sweet righteousness imputed to us by God are “a pestilence in the
Church; intractable, nay, rebellious against their superiors, they decry others
and clothe themselves with the lamb-skins of their good works.” *®
An Augustinian friend of his, George Spenlein, having become weary
of certain persecutions, had had himself transferred from Wittenberg to

the monastery at Memmingen. Luther sent him a peculiar letter of conseem that
dolence on April 8, 1516. According to this missive, it would ion
to the
opposit
“in
time
long
a
for
been
had
n
Spenlei
the self-righteous
17 Op. cit., Vol. VI, p. soo.
18 Op. cit., Vol. VI, pp. 502 sq.

68

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

self-righteousness of God, which had been bestowed most lavishly and
gratuitously upon him by Christ”; whereas he (Spenlein) desired to stand
before God with his own works and merits, which, of course, is impossible.
He (Luther), too, had harbored this notion, and says he still wrestles with
this error. “Learn, therefore, my sweet brother,” thus he addresses Spenlein
in the vocabulary of mysticism, “learn to sing to the Lord Jesus and, distrusting yourself, say to Him: Thou, O Lord Jesus, art my righteousness, but
I am Thy sin. Thou hast accepted what was mine and hast given to me what
was Thine. Oh, that thou wouldst boldly appear thyself as a sinner, yea,
be a sinner in reality; for Christ abides only in sinners.” “But, if you are
a lily and a rose of Christ, then learn to bear persecution with patience,
lest your secret pride convert you into a thorn.” ®

The germ of Luther’s reformatory doctrine is plainly contained
in this species of Mysticism. Step by step he had arrived at his new
dogma in the above described manner. The system which attacked
the basic truths of the Catholic Church, was complete in outline.
Before giving a fuller exposition of it, we must consider the individual factors which co-operated in its development in Luther’s

mind.
Confession and penance were a source of torturing offense to the
young monk. Can one obtain peace with God by the performance
of penitential works? He discussed this question with Staupitz on an
occasion when he sought consolation. Staupitz pointed out to him that

all penance must begin and end with love; that all treasures are
hidden in Christ, in whom we must trust and whom we must love.2°
These words contain nothing new; but the exhortation to combine
love with penance entered the inflammable soul of Luther as a voice
from heaven. According to his own expression, it “clung to his soul
as the sharp arrows of the mighty” (Ps. CXIX, 4); henceforward,
he says, he would execrate the hypocrisy by means of which he had
formerly sought to express a “fabricated and forced” penitential
spirit during the tortures of confession. Now that the merits
of Christ covered everything, penance appeared easy and sweet
to him. He expresses himself on this point in a grateful letter to
Staupitz, written in 1518.2!
On the occasion referred to, it is probable that Staupitz, as was
19 Enders, Luthers Briefwechsel, I, p. 29.
20 Tischreden, Weimar, ed., II, Nr. 2654.

21 Enders, Luthers Briefwechsel, 1, p. 196

(May 3o, 1518.)

OPPOSITION TO SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS

69

his custom, expressed himself in a vague and sentimental manner,
f'ather than in clear theological terms. His writings are susceptible of
improvement in many respects. The influence which he exerted on

Luther was not a wholesome one. He was too fond of him to penetrate his character. He perceived in him a rising star of his congregation, a very promising ornament of his Order. Even in the most
critical period anterior to Luther’s apostasy, he eulogized his courage

and said: Christ speaks out of your mouth,—so well it pleased him
that Luther, in the matter of righteousness and good works, ascribed
everything to Christ, to whom alone glory should be given.?? Certain
of a favorable response on the part of his superior, Luther wrote thus
in the above letter to him: “My sweet Saviour and Pardoner, to whom I

shall sing as long as I live (Ps. CIII, 33), is sufficient for me. If there

be anyone who will not sing with me, what is that to me? Let him
howl if it please him.” The short-sighted Staupitz sided with Luther
even after he had been condemned by the Church.

:

Nor was Staupitz the man who could thoroughly free Luther from

~ his doubts about predestination, although Luther says he helped
him. His general references to the wounds of Christ could not permanently set the troubled monk aright. He should have placed
definitely before him the Catholic dogma, based on Sacred Scripture,

that God sincerely desires the salvation of all men, and should have
made clear to the doubter that voluntary sin is the sole cause
of damnation. But he himself seems not to have grasped these truths,
for in certain critical passages of his writings he allows them to retreat before a certain mysterious predestination. Luther’s fear of predestination constituted the obscure substratum of his evolving new
religious system. Recalling Staupitz’s exhortations, he says, in 1§532:
We must stop at the wounds of Christ, and may not ponder over
the awful mystery. The only remedy consists in dismissing from our

minds the possibility of a verdict of damnation. “When I attend
to these ideas, I forget what Christ and God are, and sometimes arrive at the conclusion that God is a scoundrel. . . . The idea of
predestination causes us to forget God, and the Laudate ceases and
in the
the Blasphemate begins.” ¢ The part which these struggles had efforts
origin of his new doctrine, is to be sought in Luther’s violent
22 Weimar ed., XL, I, p. 131.

28 Tischreden, Weimar ed., II, Nr. 2654.

70

THE INTERIOR PROCESS

to attain to a certain repose in the face of his presumptive predestination.
It is also remarkable that the last-quoted utterance is followed by
one concerning his “great spiritual temptations.” In contrast with
the struggles of despair which he underwent, he is not deeply impressed by ordinary temptations. “No one,” he writes, “can really
write or say anything about grace, unless he has been disciplined by
spiritual temptations.” ¢ His opponents, he says elsewhere, not

having had such experiences, it behooved them to observe silence.
When his doctrine encountered opposition in Rome, he wrote to
Staupitz that Roman citations and other matters made no impression on him. “My sufferings, as you know, are incomparably greater,
and these force me to regard such temporal flashes as extremely

trivial.” 2 He meant “doubtlessly, personal, inward sufferings and
attacks which were connected with bodily ailments . . . , whereby,
as formerly, he was always seized with fear for his personal salvation

when he pondered on the hidden depths of the divine will.” 26
In his interpretation of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans,
given during the years 1515 and 1516, Luther completely unfolded
his new doctrine.
24 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1, pp. 204 3qq.
28 Op. cit., Vol. VI, pp. 100 sqq.; cfr. I, 14 3qq.
26 Julius Kostlin.

CHAPTER IV

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE
I.

INTERPRETATION

OF THE EPISTLE TO

THE ROMANS

(r515-1516)
In none of his other Epistles does St. Paul penetrate so deeply into
the questions of grace, justification, and election, as in his magnificent Epistle addressed to the Christians of Rome. Luther believed

that this profound Epistle furnished the thread that would lead him
out of his labyrinth. Disregarding the tradition of the Church concerning the meaning of the Epistle, he buried himself in its contents

and brooded over its many mysterious expressions. For him the
sacred document was to become the subject-matter of academic

lectures with entirely new ideas. How often may he not have
wandered up and down the venerable corridors of the monastery
meditating on the significance of the words of the Apostle. His
emaciated form may have become animated, his deep-set eyes may
have flashed, as he imagined to discover in the Epistle to the Romans
the desired solution of his problems. With ever-increasing confidence

he imputed to the Apostle the ideas to which he was urged for the
sake of the supposed quieting of his scruples. Simultaneously, an
arsenal of new weapons against the self-righteous Pharisees within
the Church seemed to open itself to him.

St. Paul sets forth the idea that neither the observation of the law
of nature nor that of the Mosaic law can justify man before God,
but only the grace of God now revealed through the Gospel of

Christ. In this exposition Luther erroneously discovered a denial
of the natural powers of man and the sole causality of God in His
creature—a doctrine utterly foreign to the Apostle’s mind. In the
propositions on the grace of Christ, as set forth by Paul, he discovered an ascription of the merits of Christ equally foreign to the
mind of the Apostle—a purely external imputation without works
on the part of man. St. Paul discourses sublimely on the freedom of
7F

