CuAarTER XIII

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG (1530) AND LUTHER AT
COBURG CASTLE

I. THE DIET OF AUGSBURG

Emperor Charles V was finally able to set out on his journey to
Germany, for which the German Catholics had ardently longed. The
treaty of Barcelona with the pope, and the treaty of Cambrai with
Francis, king of France, had opened the way for him.
On January 21, 1530, shortly before his coronation as emperor,
Charles published at Bologna the convocation of the imperial diet at
Augsburg, in which he himself intended to take an active part. It was
his wish that the diet should remove—peaceably, if possible—the
grounds for the religious controversy which filled him with anxiety.
It was the intention of this zealous Catholic ruler, sincerely to adopt
the ways of kindness and to effect an arrangement by peaceful
methods. For this reason the convocation adopted a conciliatory tone
and assured the Protestants that they would be given 2 hearing.
The Emperor’s brother, Ferdinand, journeyed to the Brenner in
Tyrol, to meet Charles as the latter was coming from Italy. At Gries,
on the northern declivity of the mountain, there is 2 monumental
inscription marking the spot where the brothers embraced each other.

Charles was depressed by Ferdinand’s report of the existing conditions.
Nevertheless, on June 15, the high-minded Emperor hopefully entered
the city of Augsburg.
This ancient free city on the Lech, a flourishing center of art and
commerce, still retained its venerable towered walls with moats and
gates. Inside were the homes of the wealthy and comfortably situated

patricians, and lofty, antique buildings, conspicuous among them the

palace of the bishop and the splendid town-hall, where the sessions of
the diet were to be held. Both have since been either replaced by other

structures or completely remodeled. The banking house of the Fug-

gers, which had been established ten years before, still exists, a vivid
reminder of the great commercial firm which once dominated inter374

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG

375

national trade. The Fuggers remained loyal to the Catholic Church

when the new religion established itself in the city.
Bishop Stadion of Augsburg, assisted by the Emperor and the
Catholic estates who arrived for the diet, presided over the Corpus
Christi procession which wended its way through the streets of the

city, and was celebrated with a splendor never before witnessed. The
Protestants ostentatiously kept aloof. As a consequence, the Emperor

prohibited the preaching of Protestant sermons.

When the sessions of the diet were opened, on June 20, Luther’s
partisans succeeded in inducing the estates to deliberate on the religious question before devising ways and means of combating the

Turkish menace, which Charles wished to be considered first of all.
It was their plan to submit an extensive statement justifying their
attitude on the religious question. Above all, it was their intention to
procure protection for themselves and publicly to advance their efforts

at propaganda. The so-called Augsburg Confession constituted a
means to this end. The lengthy document had been written by the
prudent and pliant Melanchthon, who at that time was very timorous,

and had the approval of Luther, who during the sessions of the diet
lived in the castle of Coburg, which was situated not far from Augsburg. The Confession was so drawn up as to speak not in the name of
Luther or the theologians, but in that of the rulers who had adopted
the new creed and by whom it was submitted. Originally, therefore,
it was a confession of faith by the princes. Afterwards it became a
symbolical document, i.e., the official statement of the Lutheran
creed. By means of this instrument, the princes intended to indicate
through Melanchthon, their spokesman, the kind of religion they had
thus far suffered to be preached within their territories. Melanchthon,
whilst engaged in the composition of this document, had also intended

it to serve as a refutation of a work of Dr. Eck, who had caused an
exhaustive theological indictment of the new religious system, consisting of 404 articles, to be submitted to the Emperor before his arrival in Augsburg.

In order to procure a favorable decision on the part of the diet, the
author of the “Confession” tried to show that in reality there were no

great differences between the two camps. He proposes certain essen-

tially Lutheran doctrines, but veils them in clever formulas devised
to show that they coincide with what the Catholic Church had always held. The question which, according to him, is of prime impor-

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG, (1530)

376

tance, is about abuses which in the general opinion of men ought to be
abolished. In fact, the first official edition of the “Confession,” printed
in 1530, contained the deceptive declaration (which was subsequently
altered) that the impugned doctrines meant no deviation from the
Scriptures or the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church, in as far

as that teaching could be ascertained from Catholic authors.
The Emperor reluctantly consented to have the *“Confession”
publicly read in the presence of the estates. It was so read on June 25,
not, however, during a regular session of the diet in the town-hall,
but in a smaller Gothic hall of the episcopal palace. The twenty-eight

articles were read in a stentorian voice by Baier, the Saxon chancellor,
who designedly read the German version of the text so distinctly
that it was audible through the open windows by those who lingered
in the courtyard without.

On closer inspection, the Catholic theologians were compelled to
marvel at the ingenuity with which a road to a pseudo-union with the
ancient Church had been kept open. They noted the absence of any

declaration relative to the pope, whom the Lutherans had come to
regard as Antichrist. The declaration was silent about the universal
priesthood of all the faithful in place of the clergy, the incapacity
of the human will to do good, and absolute predestination, the very
pillars of the doctrinal system of Lutheranism. The antitheses between
the two religions on the subject of indulgences and Purgatory were
likewise hushed up, and the differences in the veneration of the saints
had also vanished.?
Hence, honest candor, the preliminary condition of reunion, was
missing.

Luther himself censured the omission of some of his doctrines.
However, he did not wish to disavow the action of Melanchthon, his

indispensable, industrious, and respected mediator. He averred that
“he could not step as softly and quietly as he” (Melanchthon) 2 and
regarded himself as incompetent to deliberate in such an assembly.
By order of the Emperor, Catholic theologians at once undertook
1 Corpus Ref., XXVI, p. 290. Luther also maintains: *Audita nostrorum confessione

primum

communis

vox

et

sententis

ommnium

fuit,

nos

mibil

docere

contra

ullum

fidei

articulum mneque comtra scripturam. . . . . ® Letter to Joh. Brismann, November 7, 15303
Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 311.
_
" Letter of May 15, 1530, to the Elector John of Saxony; Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, pP. 148
(Briefwechsel, VII, p. 335). In a letter to Jonas, July 21

(Briefwechsel, VIII, p-

Luther also says that the Confession conceals important doctrines.

133),

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG

377

to compose a refutation of the “Confession,” in order to expose its

errors as well as its vagueness and its omissions. In addition to Eck,
Faber, and Cochlaeus, were some of the other Catholic apologists
whom we have heretofore mentioned: Usingen, Dietenberger, Wimpina, etc. ‘The opposition was officially asked whether they had any
other articles they wished to defend besides those contained in the
*“Confession” which they had submitted. They replied evasively. The
tone of the hastily composed Catholic “Confutatio” appeared too offensive to the Emperor and his advisers. It was revised and, after it had
been cast into the form of an answer given by the Emperor, was read
aloud on August 3 in the same hall in which the Protestants had been
permitted to submit their “Confession.”
The Emperor now ordered the Protestants to return to the pale of
the Christian communion, which they had deserted, lest he be compelled to proceed against them in his capacity of “guardian and protector of the Church,” which was his bounden duty as emperor. At
that time Charles was actually inclined to resort to military force,
but after October 30, in virtue of the representations of the Catholic
estates, he became somewhat reconciled to the idea of a general
council, not, however, until the time for waging a successful war had
passed.® The papal legate, Campeggio, was in favor of the strictest possible execution of the edict of Worms.
In a state of painful anxiety, Melanchthon approached Campeggio
with proposals suggested by the delusive hope of coming to a mutually
satisfactory agreement. While he shuddered at the thought of an open
break, he did not wish to yield in principle, although many of the
Catholic leaders hoped for his conversion on account of his conciliatory addresses. In the subsequent negotiations he became more and
more a pitiable figure.* His depressed condition of mind is the only
thing that helps him over the charge of conscious deception. Many
friends of the Lutheran cause were opposed to him and to any kind of
approach between the two parties. Landgrave Philip of Hesse, to
signify his protest, left Augsburg precipitately.
The negotiations which the Emperor had authorized between seven

representatives of each faction proved fruitless. In vain did the
8 Cf. E. W. Mayer, Forschungen zur Politik Karls V. wibrend des Augsburger Reichstags (Archiv fiir Reformationsgeschichte, 1916, pp. 40 sqq.).
4 Grisar, Melanchtons ritselbafte Nachgiebigkeit auf dem Augsburger Reichstag (Histor.
Jabrbuch, XLI [1921], pp. 257-267; Luther-Analekten VI). Cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II,
pp. 383 sqq.

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG, (1530)

378

Catholic spokesmen, subject to papal approval, offer to have the laychalice introduced in the Protestant districts, or to tolerate the marriage of priests until the assembly of a general council. Every effort to
restore peace failed in consequence of the inflexible attitude of Luther,
who issued frequent letters from the castle of Coburg. Melanchthon
indicated his willingness to have the jurisdiction of the bishops restored, but it was an insidious and ineffectual offer, because of the
underlying presupposition that the bishops would have to give free
scope to the new “‘gospel.” ® A smaller commission thereupon undertook to effect an understanding. Its Catholic members were: Eck,

Cochlaeus and Wimpina, but their efforts were futile.

In the meantime Melanchthon’s tireless pen produced an “Apologia
Confessionis Augustanae,” which was directed against the Catholic
“Confutatio.” His party, however, did not succeed in having this
“Apologia” publicly read. Upon his homeward return, the author
privately published a Latin edition of it. The “Apologia,” like the

“Confession,” was soon regarded by Protestants as a symbol of their
faith.

Meantime the number of estates who declared their adherence to
the Augsburg “Confession” constantly increased. The original signers
were: Elector John of Saxony, Margrave George of Ansbach, Duke
Ernest of Braunschweig-Liineburg, Landgrave Philip of Hesse, and
Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt. In addition to these names, the Latin
copy of the “Augsburg Confession” contained those of John Frederick, heir to the throne of Electoral Saxony, and Duke Francis of
Braunschweig-Liineburg. Nuremberg and Reutlingen were the only
cities to subscribe. Four cities which professed Zwinglianism, namely,

Strasburg, Constance, Memmingen, and Lindau, submitted a separate profession of faith, composed by Bucer and Capito; it was
called “Confessio Tetrapolitana.” Other cities of Upper Germany,
though favoring the Reformation, kept aloof. In the course of the
deliberations at the diet of Augsburg a better understanding was
effected between the Lutherans and the Upper Germans with respect
5 Wilhelm Walther, Fiir Luther, p. 434: “Melanchthon was only too ready to acquiesce
in equivocal formulas and to make concessions which in truth could not be harmonized
with the ‘reservation that nothing may be conceded which contradicts the Gospel’; a reservation

which

was

constantly

repeated.”

The

Protestant

historian

A.

Berger

(Luther

in kulturgeschichtlicher Darstellung (1889), Vol. II, I; pp. 226 sq.) notes the weak attitude of Melanchthon and says that, “objectively considered,” it was “a betrayal of the
Protestant conscience.”

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG

379

to the Augsburg Confession, although Article X of the Confession
was supposed to be directed against Zwingli. Bucer was a smooth
politician and knew how to surmount the difficulties arising from that

document. After several of the cities represented in the diet had accepted the Confession, Strasburg also declared its adherence at a conference which was held towards the end of December, 1530, at
Schmalkalden. Thus everything conspired towards the creation of the
fateful League named after that city.
The Protestant leaders at the diet of Augsburg used the new
evangel as the basis of a political alliance designed to divide Germany.
Before his departure, the Landgrave of Hesse threateningly declared
that if he had to die for the faith, certain leaders of the opposition
would die with him.
After some delay, due partly to the Turkish menace and partly to
his own scruples, Emperor Charles issued a decree prohibiting all theological innovations. The Protestants were ordered to accept the articles
upon which no agreement had been reached, by the fifteenth of April
of the next year, at the very latest. They vociferously objected to this
and at the same time refused to consent to the required intervention

against the German Zwinglians and the danger to the Empire caused
by them and by Zwingli at Zurich. Nevertheless, the Emperor, in his
Reichstagsabschied of November 19, renewed the edict of Worms
with its severe measures, but at the same time referred the litigants to
the coming ecumenical council, which was expected within a year.%
Both the renewal of the edict of Worms as well as the Emperor’s
reference to the expected convocation of a general council proved
ineffectual. The edict could not be enforced because of the united

front of the opposition, and the council was postponed by Pope
Clement VII because of the fear that schisms would develop among
the faithful, because of the expectation of small benefit to those who
had separated from the Church, and, still more, because of the political difficulties in the way of holding a council.
Thus the diet of Augsburg, which had been hailed with such great

expectations by the Catholics, due principally to the obstinate attitude
of the Protestants, in a certain measure furthered the unfortunate
schism. On December 12, Luther gloatingly reminded his elector that
the schemes of men “always turn out differently than expected, so that
one must say: I surely did not intend that. Pope and Emperor did not
8 Cf. 'Janssen-Pastor, III, pp. 251 sqq.; Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 384.

380

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

succeed at Augsburg as they expected; nor shall they succeed henceforth.” He imagines that his party is sustained by God and will
“remain with God.” 7

Nothing illustrates Luther’s way of thinking and proceeding
more graphically than a close scrutiny of his behavior during his
sojourn in the lonely castle of Coburg at the time of the diet of Augsburg.
2. LUTHER IN THE CASTLE OF COBURG

The ancient castle of Coburg rises above the city of the same name

on the south side of the Thuringian Forest, in the midst of attractive
rows of hills. A road, rising gently at first, but soon growing steeper,

leads up to the castle, which once upon a time was rightly styled

“Frankish Crown.” Even to-day the visitor beholds in it the best type
of the massive, crown-like castle of the Middle Ages, simply yet magnificently constructed.
During the diet of Augsburg, Luther resided in the topmost portion
of the edifice, reserved for princes. His suite is still extant. As he
walked upon the detached so-called High Bastion on the side of the
courtyard, he had an unobstructed and charming view of the splendid
landscape in the direction of the city where the fate of his theological
system appeared to be at issue. As an outlaw, Luther could not entet
Augsburg; therefore the Elector of Saxony, who owned this castle,
had assigned it to him for a residence, whence he could easily correspond with his representatives at the diet.
This lonely and almost unoccupied castle became a “Sinai”’ and a
“hermitage” to him. In his first correspondence “from the kingdom
of the jackdaws” he humorously describes the antics of the birds about
his lofty room, comparing them with the garrulous and agitated as-sembly at Augsburg. Good humor, he says, was necessary to “repulse the heavy thoughts which rushed in upon him, so far as they
permitted themselves to be banished.” 8
The thoughts which occupied his mind during well-nigh the entire
time of his sojourn at the castle of Coburg, and which often tortured
him, not only concerned the diet; he was afflicted by deep anxiety
" Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, p. 201 (Briefwechsel, Vol. VIII, p. 331).
8 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 196,

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

381

regarding the Turkish menace to Germany, no less than by interior
“temptations” against his teaching.

Luther arrived at Coburg on April 15, 1530, and remained in the
castle up to October 5. Aside from the inevitable visitors, his only
company consisted of a young pupil, Master Vitus Dietrich, and
a

nephew, Cyriac Kaufmann, a student at Wittenberg.
The first task which he undertook to discharge was the composition
of a violent pamphlet by which he intended to intimidate the clerical
members of the diet. It appeared under the title: “A Warning to the
Clergy assembled at the Diet of Augsburg.” ® With passionate exaggeration he reproaches them on account of their immoral lives, the
abuses in the government of the Church, and eulogizes the Refor-

mation. He threatens them with revolution if they obstruct his gospel.

In terrifying words he calls out to the assembly: “Alive, I am your
plague; dying, I am your death; for God has instigated me against you.
I must be unto you, as Osee says (XIII, 7 sq.), a bear and a lion in the
way of Assur. Ye shall have no peace before my name, until you

amend your ways or perish.”
Then he worked on his translation of the Bible, especially Jeremias
and Ezechiel. Whilst engaged in the study of Jeremias, his soul was
overcome by a profoundly mystical mood. He was captivated by the
prophecy concerning Gog and Magog, whose names pertained to the
most remote and barbarous period of paganism, and were connected
with the destruction within the kingdom of God. Luther interpreted
the prophecy as signifying the devastating incursion of the Turks. He
published this interpretation in a special work immediately after the
publication of his ““Warning to the Clergy.” 1° From the Psalter, with
which he also occupied himself, he next selected for publication, under
the title, “The Beautiful Confitemini,” his interpretation of Psalm 117

(Vulgate), which he held in great esteem.!! It is the Psalm which the
Breviary prescribes for recitation on Sunday, beginning with “Con-

fitemini Domino quoniam bonus. . . . Dicat nunc Israel,” etc. Luther
was wont to apply this Psalm to his dangers and his confidence in
9 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, II, pp. 268 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIV, 2nd ed., p. 356.
10 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, II, pp. 223 sqq.; Erl. ed., XLI, pp. 220sq. In this little tract,
" Luther, under the influence of a strong illusion, claims that the Turks had special designs
against him and his little band of followers, but Christ, according to the prophecy, will
destroy both pope and Turk, “with His splendid advent, which we daily expect.”

11 Weimar ed., Vol. XXXI, I, pp. 65 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XLI, pp. 1sqq.

382

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

salvation, the latter especially because of the passage: “I shall not die,
but live: and shall declare the works of the Lord.” In order to relieve

himself in his physical and mental sufferings he inscribed these words
with musical notations on the wall of his room at Coburg castle,
where they were seen by the phys1c1an Ratzeberger twenty years
afterwards.

Later, his anxiety concerning the Augsburg diet once more set his
pen in motion. He published an “Open Letter” to Archbishop Albrecht of Mayence, who, as yet, was not sufficiently pliable to suit
Luther, but took a conciliatory attitude.!? In terms far milder than
those of his “Warning,” he demands that, since it was impossible for
them to unite, the rival religious parties be unmolested in their respective professions of faith.
In consequence of physical and mental axlments, his literary labors
became more and more difficult. His afflictions were partly a result of
nervous over-excitement, and partly an effect of the hasty and impassioned labors which he performed. He had not been well even
before he left Wittenberg. Beginning with the end of January, 1529,
his melancholia was aggravated at times by violent spells of dizziness
and a ringing noise in the head. On January 1, 1530, he said in a sermon at Wittenberg that he would not ascend the pulpit any more
because of his disgust at the indifference of the people towards the
Word of God. According to a remark of the editor of the sermon in
the Weimar Edition, this declaration admits that “the only possible
explanation of this step is a pathological one.” '* In May he found it
impossible to work for weeks at a time on account of buzzing sensations which he described as “thunder in the head,” and a tendency to

swoon.4
He assigned the cause of his afflictions to the devil, who enlivened
Luther’s imagination with peculiar images during his sojourn at Co-

burg. The ex-monk firmly believed in the Satanic apparitions and
effects which were reported to him at that time. Thus he declared
that he had seen a large host of mysterious spirits, who, coming from
Cologne, caused themselves to be carried across the river at Spires and
marched towards Augsburg to attend the diet. “They were evil spirits,
12 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, p. 397; Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, pp.

VIII, pp. 84sqq.).

13 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 168.
14 1bid., pp. 99 sqq.

159 sqq.

(Brtefwecbsel

SPIRITUAL AGONIES

383

devils in disguise.” Melanchthon regarded them as omens of a “terrible revolution,” and his son-in-law, George Sabinus, described the

apparitions in poetical form. Luther afterwards defied the wrath of

these spirits by exclaiming: “Let them have their way—those spectremonks of Spires!” 5 Luther avidly accepted the report of Bugenhagen, who wrote from Liibeck at the time that the devil had testified for the new gospel through the medium of a maiden who was
possessed by him. “The cunning demon,” he wrote, “designs prodigies.” 18

Concerning himself, he complains in a letter to Melanchthon (May
12, 1530) that when he was alone (Dietrich and Kaufmann being

absent) the devil sent “his messenger” to him and so overpowered him
with gloomy thoughts that he was driven out of his room and forced
to seek other companions. “I can hardly await the day,” he adds in a

characteristic phrase, “when we shall see the great power of this
spirit and, as it were, his almost divine majesty.” 17

At Coburg he saw the devil in a phantastic visual illusion. About
nine o’clock, on the evening of a rainy day in June, as he stood at his

window and looked out over the little forest near by, as Vitus Dietrich bears witness, he saw “a fiery, flaming serpent, which, after twisting and writhing about, dropped from the roof of the nearest tower

down into the wood. He at once called me and wanted to show me
the ghost (spectrum), as I stood by his shoulder. But suddenly he saw
it disappear. Shortly after, we both saw the apparition again. It had,

however, altered its shape, and now looked more like a great flaming
star lying in the field, so that we were able to distinguish it plainly,
even though the weather was rainy.” *® In his fright, Luther regarded
the apparition as the devil. It may have been one of the inmates of the
castle passing by with a torch or a brightly shining lantern which cast

a reflexion on the roof, the woods and field. Whoever visits the place
will at once perceive that this is a plausible explanation. Luther, however, was so sure he had seen the devil that he mentioned it in the following year to those who were present to aid him in the revision of his
German translation of the Psalms. He said: “I saw my devil flying
over the wood at Coburg,” adding that Psalm 18 (Vulg. 17), verse
15 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 387; Vol, VI, p. 209.
16 1bid., Vol. III, pp. 410 sq.

17 Briefwechsel, VII, p. 332: “Habuit Satan legationem suam apud me.” He is eager to

see his plane divina majestas.
18 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 13o0.

384

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

15, which they were just then discussing, speaks of a materia ignita. *°

His morbid fancy was followed by an unusually violent buzzing in

the head and an increased tendency to faintness in the succeeding
night—symptoms which indicated that his nervousness had reached
a crisis. To young Dietrich this was but a new proof that all the ail-

ments of his master were caused by the devil who had just appeared
to them. It is not surprising that a blotch of ink on the wall of the
room which Luther occupied in this castle was later attributed to Old
Nick, just as the legendary one in the Wartburg.?® Outside of this
case, we know of no other manifestation of the evil spirit to- Luther.
Luther himself tells us many details of the spiritual “temptations”

to which he was subject at this time. He compares his soul, assailed

by temptations, to a land dried up by heat and wind and thirsting for
water.2! He says that he is far stronger in his public controversies than
in these personal struggles.?? To Melanchthon he writes that he would
rather endure this torture of the body than “that hangman of the

spirit who . . . will never stop until he has gobbled me up.” 2 After
his return to Wittenberg, he recalled these spiritual struggles with
horror. He was but forty-seven when he wrote to Amsdorf: “I now
am really beginning to feel the weight of my years, and my powers
are going. The angel of Satan [2 Cor. XII, 7] has indeed dealt hardly
with me.” 2* On another occasion he said to Dietrich at the Coburg,
if he were to die (he had already selected a place for his grave),
and his body were cut open, his heart would be found all shrivelled
up “in consequence of my distress and sadness of spirit.” 2°

These well-attested spiritual agonies of the ex-monk, which were
naturally accompanied by qualms of conscience, stand in striking
contrast to the narratives of most Protestant biographers, who laud
the spiritual repose, the interior joy, and unflinching faith of Luther
in the days which he spent in the castle of Coburg. It is true that when
storms assailed him he constantly sought comfort in the idea that his
restlessness was attributable to the devil and that he finally overcame
his scruples with increased defiance.
19 1bid.

20 Jbid., Vol. II, p. 9é.

21 1bid., Vol. 11, p. 390, and Vol. V, p. 346.
22 1bid., Vol. 1I, p. 3g0.
23 1bid., Vol. V, p. 347.
24 1bid,
25 1bid., Vol. V, p. 348.

SPIRITUAL AGONIES

385

At that time he advised one of his pupils, Jerome Weller, how to conduct
himself when assailed by “temptations.” The latter was tormented by great
fear as to the forgiveness of his sins and the spiritual condition of his soul.?®

Luther assures him that he also had such temptations, which were caused by

the devil, who insidiously persecutes us on account of our belief and trust in
Christ. Hence, when tempted “to despair and blaspheme,” one should disregard the temptation as much as possible. Avoid being alone, he advises him;
jest with my wife, imbibe somewhat more freely. Such temptations are use-

ful. By means of them he himself had become “a great doctor.” Moreover,
Weller should not fear on account of minor moral infractions. When thus
afflicted, “some kind of sin should be committed,” in order to manifest one’s
hatred and contempt for the devil. If the devil tempt me, he should “know
that I acknowledge no sin and hold myself guiltless. The Ten ‘Command-

ments, with which the devil afflicts and tortures us so much,” ought to be
removed from our sight and our mind. Satan is simply to be referred to our
Saviour, the Son of God.?”
In this strange letter Luther also recalls his monastic days. It is possible
that, in the lonely life which he led in the castle of Coburg, his monastic

past may have impressed itself upon him more forcibly in contrast with his
present career; just as, during his seclusion at the Wartburg, he was similarly
impressed with the significance of his monastic vows. In his letter to young
Weller, he refers to the fearful and terrible thoughts (borrificae et terrificae
cogitationes) with which he was tortured while a monk.

He persuaded himself more and more that the feeling of depression
which he had experienced in the monastery was entirely a result of
his observance of the Catholic doctrine of virtue and merit. He now
held that a doctrine which makes piety dependent upon meritorious

works, instead of on faith alone, was unable to give peace, but could
only engender misery and fear in the soul. It was only after he had
discovered his new Gospel that the way of interior peace opened to
him.

This is Luther’s legendary version of his monastic life, an inter-

pretation of his youthful experience made in after years. It is a
weapon which after his sojourn at the castle of Coburg he began to

use with predilection in his fight upon the ancient Church.*®

26 In July (?), 1530; Briefwechsel, VIII, pp. 159 sqq. Cf. the letter to the same, dated

August 15, 1530; ibid., p. 188.

27 “Nonnunquam largius bibendum, ludendum, nugandum, atque adeo peccatum aliquod
faciendum in odium et comtemptum diaboli. Utinam possem aliquid insigne peccati desig-

nare modo ad eludendum diabolum, ut intelligeret, me nullum peccatum agnoscere ac me

nullius peccati mibi esse conscium.”

28 For additional details see Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 187 sqq.

386

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

Formerly he had hardly made this charge; but now he claims to have been
a pious monk, “one of the best,” according to the Catholic ideal—a monk
who languished unto death in the performance of the works of papism, with
its fasting, vigils, freezing, etc.; and if ever anyone entered Heaven by such
“monkish” practices, he, too, had been determined thus to get there.”® Hence,
even if he was driven to despair in consequence of it, he was well acquainted
by personal experience with the “over-sweetened infernal poison cake” and
the untenableness of the Catholic doctrine of good works, which is sure to
make all men as unhappy as he had been in the monastery.
In making these charges he fails to take into consideration that the unhappy state in which he found himself after his apostasy was not a result of
the doctrine and practice of the Catholic Church, but rather a product of
his own over-wrought and sickly condition; that a contributory cause was
his willfulness, as opposed to the discreet spirit of the rule and the direction
of his religious superiors; and that thousands have attained to the greatest
interior happiness by the conscientious observance of the Evangelical Counsels and the performance of good works.

The false notion referred to crops out in the writings which he issued
from the castle of Coburg. Thus he says: “If a conscience is intent upon its
works and builds on them, it is erected upon loose sand; it is ever slipping
and sliding away; it must ever be seeking for works, for one and then for
another, and ever more and more, until at last even the dead are clad in
monks’ cowls, the better to reach Heaven.” However, by means of his new
doctrine, he had prevented this calamity.? The legend of the emancipated
holy monk Martin is utilized after his return to Wittenberg in the sermons

which he commenced to preach in 1530 on chapters VI to VIII of St. John’s
Gospel, where he says that he had “mortified and tortured” himself like
others, nay, even more than they, and accomplished thereby only this, that

while “one of the best” of monks, he was in despair and so far removed from

the faith that he “would have been ashamed to assert that Christ was the
Redeemer.” The papacy did not want a2 Redeemer, but wished to achieve re-

demption by means of its works.

Improbable though it was, this legend of Luther’s monastic experience became increasingly prominent up to the close of his life,
when it grew still more pronounced, and imposed itself upon countless
thousands. It is still widely believed to-day.
Besides the tribulations which filled the soul of Luther during his
abode in the castie of Coburg, the death of his aged father depressed
him greatly. Hans Luther departed this life on May 29, “strong in
29 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 305.
80 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 230.

THE “PROVISO OF THE GOSPEL”

387

his faith in Christ,” as Martin learned.3! The news of his father’s
illness having been communicated to him, he addressed a consolatory
letter to him from Wittenberg in the middle of February. Gladly, he

writes, would he have visited him, had the journey not been fraught
with such grave peril to himself; “peasants and princes” were opposed
to him, and he did not dare “to tempt God by exposing himself to
danger.” 32 Yet it was only a matter of a short journey within the
territory of the Elector. The words quoted testify to the isolation in
which this once popular man now found himself. After the Peasants’
War his popularity had waned. Many of the lower classes regarded
him as their oppressor, while the upper classes were largely at war

with him because they had enriched themselves by robbing the

Church.?® But more of this anon.

3. THE “PROVISO OF THE GOSPEL”

Luther learned with satisfaction that the Augsburg Confession had
been read in the presence of the estates of the Empire. But he did not
share Melanchthon’s expectation that it would lead to some sort of

reunion. His opinion was that rejection was the only thing to be expected from the “obduracy” of his enemies. He would “not allow
himself to be discouraged, no matter what the course of events” at
Augsburg might be, he declared to Melanchthon.®*

In addition to the latter, Jonas, Agricola, Spalatin, Brenz, and
others were active in promoting Luther’s cause. It was to them and to

Melanchthon that he wrote: “If we fall, Christ, the Ruler of the
world, falls with us.” 3 The Emperor, though well-intentioned, is
unable to prevail against so many devils. Should he, however, “take a
stand against the plain Scriptures or the Word of God,” his decision
cannot bind us.3¢ There can be no question of restoring the property
of the Church. It would be an advantage for his partisans to demand
a council, since the demand could not be satisfied.

At the beginning of the negotiations proposed by Melanchthon,
which at first concerned external matters only, Luther declared him81 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 209.

32 February 15, 1530; Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, p. 130 (Briefwechsel, VII, p. 230).
33 On Luther’s declining popularity, cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 75 sqq.

34 On June 29; Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 43.
35 On June 3o0; ibid., p. s1.

36 Cf. Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, pp. 216 sq., 225.

:

388

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

self in favor of declining all concessions contrary to the Gospel, .and
demanded courage and perseverance on the part of his representatives.

He would prefer—thus he wrote on July 15—that they shoulc% de.part for home. “Ever and anon homeward, always homeward,”,
is his
watch-word.?” His letters to the Elector John of Saxony also demonstrate his negative attitude.
Under date of August 26, he writes a curious letter to Melanchthon. He encourages his pusillanimous friend, whom he always treated
with great indulgence, in his ambiguous proposals: *“I am certain that

you will be unable to commit aught, except at the utmost a personal
offense against me, so that we shall be charged with perfidy and vacillation. But what will the consequence be? Matters may easily be
remedied by the steadfastness and the truth of our cause. True, I do
not wish that it should so happen; but speak in such wise that, if it

should happen, despondency do not ensue. For, once we shall have
attained peace and escaped violence, we shall easily make amends for

our tricks (lies) and failings, because God’s mercy rules over us. ‘Do
manfully, and let your heart take courage, all ye who wait for the

Lord’ (Psalm XXVI, 14).” Later editions have omitted the word

“lies (mendacia) which appeared in brackets between “tricks” and

“failings.” The textual tradition, however, renders it probable that
the deleted word appeared in the original, which is lost. But even if it

had not appeared there, Luther’s mind is sufficiently expressed by the
words “tricks” and “failings” (doli et lapsus) .3

His strictures grow more severe in course of the following month,
especially when, on September 20, he receives reports from the
Nuremberg representatives at the Augsburg diet, bitterly complaining
of Melanchthon’s obsequiousness. “I am actually bursting with anger

and indignation,” he wrote to Jonas on this occasion. “I beseech

to cut the matter short and come back home.” “They have our

you

Con-

fession and the gospel . . . If war is to come, then let it come.
We
have done and prayed enough. The Lord has given them over
to us
as a holocaust ‘to reward them according to their works’
[2 Tim.

IV, 14]; us, His people, He will save from the fiery
furnace of
Babylon. . . . What I have written for you is meant for
all.” %9
87 Letter to Jonas, etc.; Briefwechsel, VI, p. 113.
38 On August 28; Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 235. For

article on the same in the Stimmen aus Maria-Laach,

89 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 391.

more details on this letter, see my

1913, No. 3, pp. 286 sqq.

THE “PROVISO OF THE GOSPEL”

389

Weriting to his friend Link, he expresses the hope that no definite
concessions will be made to the opposition; Christ will transform
all offers “into a lance by which to play a deceptive game with the
opponents who intend to play us false; Christ is preparing their destruction in the Red Sea.” 4°
In a more considerate tone he pleads with Melanchthon, who is bur-

dened with so many cares, to furnish him with more accurate information; for he fears that he will be made a victim of violence and
deception.

In order to console Spengler, his informant from Nuremberg, who
had indulged in laments, he wrote to him: “Though Christ may
appear to be somewhat weak, this does not mean that He is pushed out
of His seat. . . . In the proviso concerning the Gospel, there are embodied snares (insidiae) other than those which our adversaries can
employ against us.” ** Hence, in the last analysis, the proviso concerning the Gospel and its secret snares (insidiae) was expected to save
everything. This means: No agreement may be regarded as valid or
binding if it runs counter to the new gospel, even though such concessions are made.

In the meantime events at Augsburg followed the course we have

already described.

The greatest sensation was produced by Melanchthon’s concession
to recognize the jurisdiction of the bishops under certain conditions.
In treating of this proposal, Luther, on September 23, writes to his

confidant, Nicholas Hausmann, to the effect that the main condition
for the recognition of episcopal jurisdiction was this, that the bishops

“were to attend to the teaching of the Gospel”; and he adds in all

seriousness that nothing had been done in this direction and hence

his enemies had conjured up their own destruction.*? He speaks as if
the concession was not 2 mere pretense.

Still more characteristic is Luther’s excuse after the close of the
diet, addressed to Landgrave Philip of Hesse in response to the latter’s complaint. Here he frankly admits the true nature of the proposed recognition of episcopal jurisdiction: It was not at all to be

feared that this proposal would be accepted; moreover, it never could

have been accepted; but, he avers, it served “to raise our repute still
40 Kstlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 237.

41 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 385.

42 Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 269; Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 387 sq.

390

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

further” (i. e., to capture public opinion). The offer would have been
a mistake only if it had been adopted. Philip, therefore, ought to be
satisfied; in his next work, he (Luther) proposes to discuss at length
the unfairness of his opponents.*? In this work, entitled “Warning,”
he actually boasts of the conciliatory attitude of his partisans at Augsburg. Nevertheless, all peace overtures were lost upon those obstinate
men. “Our offers, our prayers, our cries for peace” were all wasted.**
The real nature of the “proviso of the Gospel” is revealed only if
due consideration is given to all these texts.
Towards the end of his sojourn at the castle of Coburg, Luther was
visited by Martin Bucer and John Frederick, the son and future
successor of the Elector of Saxony. Both found him in comparatively

good health. His exterior appearance had changed, due to a long
beard which he wore until his return to Wittenberg. Bucer’s object

was to effect an approach between his party, which sympathized with

Zwingli, and Luther, relative to the controversy on the Eucharist.
He by his artful diplomacy succeeded in impressing Luther
favorably by means of a vague formula on the Real Presence. After
the termination of the diet, Luther probably hoped to resist the Emperor with a more numerous and more compact following. Prince
John Frederick, eager to show his respects to Luther, presented him
with a precious signet-ring bearing the latter’s “escutcheon,”—a
heart overlayed with a cross in the midst of a rose. Luther at once
found a mystical interpretation for this symbol, by referring it to
his doctrine and position.
With a certain resignation he discussed with these and other callers
the unfavorable decision of the diet. In reality, and as a matter of
course, he did not expect and could not have expected any other.

In his letters he now entrusted everything to Providence.”
His letters and writings at this period contain pious and beautiful sentiment
s
and abound in phrases calculated to console himself and his friends.

Some historians love to extol the excellence of the prayers which he

composed during his solitude. Among others they refer to a collectio

of exhortations which he compiled at that time. It is, in reality,

n

a

treasury of elevating thoughts, taken from Holy Writ to arouse confidence in God.*5 It is apparent at once, however, that all the texts
43 Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 295; Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 388.
44 Jbid., pp. 388—389.

45 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 700 $qq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIII,
pp. 154 sq. Cf. Haussleiter in the Newe Kirchliche Zeitschrift, 1917, Pp. 149 $qq.

LUTHER’S WRITINGS AT COBURG

391

have been selected to serve as a defense and confirmation of the personal standpoint which Luther assumed in his contentions. The same
is true of most of his prayers. They are designed to corroborate his
presumptive right. Every true prayer ought to contain, above all

else, a petition to know and bow before the will of God, even as re-

lated to the whole conception of life. In the prayers which Luther
composed such willingness is hardly detectable. He will not concede
the possibility that another course besides the one which he has entered upon may be the right one.

This observation is applicable also to the frequently cited prayer
which Vitus Dietrich is supposed to have heard from Luther’s lips,
and which culminates in the words addressed to God: “Thou hast
power to extirpate the persecutors of Thy children; if Thou dost not
do-it, the danger is Thine. What we have done, we had to do.” *¢

Such is not the spirit. of resignation as expressed in the fiat voluntas
tua, the basis and crown of all prayer; but it is 2 command addressed

to God to do the bidding of the supplicant. Dietrich, who was an
enthusiastic disciple, also tells us that Luther, while sojourning in the
castle of Coburg, devoted at least three hours daily to prayer. It is

not unlikely that many an hour may have been spent by him in sighing for relief, especially when he was unfit for work and in periods

of protracted sickness and spiritual affliction. Moreover, his work of
translation undoubtedly offered him many opportunities of meditating on the Psalms and other Biblical texts. Hence, it is probable that
his customary prayer may have often been protracted. But it is difficult to believe that Luther devoted himself regularly to prayers for
more than three hours daily. The strenuous literary work which he
performed demanded a most diligent use of time.
4. LUTHER’S WRITINGS DURING HIS SOJOURN AT COBURG AND THE
FOLLOWING MONTHS

Some of the works produced by Luther’s tireless pen during this

period have already been mentioned.

Among the others, which are to be classed with them, his treatise
on Purgatory should be noted.*” It was written by Luther to supply
46 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, original German ed., Vol. III, p. 998.

.

47 “Widerruf vom Fegfeuer,” Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 367 sqq.; Exl. ed., Vol.

XXXI, pp. 184 sqq.

392

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

the absence of any reference to this subject in the Augsburg Confession, and to disclose all the disgraceful lies and atrocities of this papis~

tical doctrine which, he asserted, had been introduced allegedly for

the sake of filthy lucre.

Simultaneously with this work he published a tract in German and
Latin, entitled, “Some Articles which Martin Luther will uphold
against the entire School of Satan.” *® It comprises forty theses, which
had been occasioned by the negotiations at Augsburg. Of these, no
less than ten are an attempt to demonstrate the astounding proposition that the marriage of priests is to be regarded as a Christian institution even according to the papists, and that those who inveigh

against it, therefore, deserve to be branded as “public assassins, rob-

bers, traitors, liars and miscreants.”
The book “On the Keys,” to which Luther devoted himself imme-

diately after, and which he rewrote twice, was his most important

work on the power of the Church.#® He teaches here that sins are

not remitted by the Church in virtue of an (imaginary) power of the

keys, but by the word of grace entrusted to the congregation, of
which each individual avails himself in faith. If sins are to be retained

instead of forgiven, the congregation must co-operate; it must be the

“co-judge”; and hence, for the sake of discipline, sinners must be
properly denounced. It was an exaggerated and impracticable de-

mand, as he himself experienced in his several attempts to introduce
the ban.?°

The “Epistle of M. Luther on Translation and on the Intercession
of the Saints” °! in its first and longer section is a defense of the principles followed by him in translating the Bible. Among other things,
he undertakes to formulate an extensive justification of his arbitrary
insertion of the word “alone” in Rom. III, 28: “For we account a
man to be justified by faith ALONE, without the works of the law.”

The Catholics severely criticized him for inserting the word “alone”
in the interests of his doctrine. It was intended to strengthen the Lutheran position, though it must be admitted that the legitimate mean-

ing of the text, as preserved by tradition, is not exactly

incompatible

48 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 420 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXXI,
pp. 121 sqq.
49 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 435 sqq. Erl. ed., Vol. XXXI,
pp. 126 sqq.
80 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, I, p- 223: “Luther adheres
to this, although he knew

how difficult it was to establish ecclesiastical discipline
according to this principle in the
new evangelical churches.”

51 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 632 sqq.; Erl, ed., Vol.
LXV, pp. 102 sqq.

LUTHER’S WRITINGS AT COBURG

393

with the word “alone.” Luther insists most vigorously upon his interpolation. “I will not have either the pope-ass or a mule for judge.”

“I would not answer such asses, nor reply to their vain, monotonous
babbling about the word sols, otherwise than to say: Luther will
have it so and says, he is a doctor superior to all other doctors in all
popedom. Thus shall it be.” With an appearance of humor and a
high sense of superiority he repeats that, if there be any “papist who
would make himself obnoxious on account of the word sols,” he
“should be told straightway that Dr. Martin Luther will have it so.
. . « Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.” He would also “rail
and boast for once against the blockheads, as St. Paul did against his
crazy saints” (2 Cor. XI, 21 sqq.), etc.’2 Only an abnormal person

with a deep-seated grudge could write in this manner. Apart from
this, the treatise here under review contains many good suggestions, in
particular concerning the task which he proposed to himself of faith-

fully reproducing, in conformity with the genius of the German

language, the ideas of the sacred writer rather than their material
words.

The second part, which attacks the Catholic doctrine of the invocation and veneration of saints as a ‘“‘shameless lie of the pope-ass,”
constitutes but a loose appendix to this queer “Epistle.” Luther in-

cidentally admits that “it has been immeasurably painful” to him to
have “torn” himself away from the saints. He is well aware that the
veneration of the saints is an ancient heirloom “of all Christendom.”
Another literary product of his sojourn at Coburg Castle bears the
title, “Admonition relative to the Sacrament of the Body and Blood

.of Christ.” Besides piously exhorting the evangelicals, it attacks the
doctrine of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass as upheld by the Catholics
at Augsburg.®®

:

By means of his work, “That Children Should be Urged to Attend
School,” 5 Luther designed to remove a drawback which vexed him

very much in connection with the appointment of pastors.

As early as 1524 he had discussed this matter in his “Appeal to the Aldermen of all Cities.” In consequence of the religious contentions and the
social revolution, the schools had detex:iorated very much. He now laments
52 For further details see Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 515 sqq.
53 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 595 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIII, pp. 162 sqq.

54 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, ii, pp. 517 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XVII, 2 ed., p. 377 599 Cf. my

article on “Luther” in the Pidagogisches Lexikon of Roloff.

394

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

and fears that eventually there will be no fit candidates available for the
pastoral office, as a consequence of which there will be but one pastor to
every ten villages. The decline of the schools would likewise prove dangerous

to the secular offices. The proposals which he develops for the education of
youth are good; but here again he treats the Catholic schools of the past
with flagrant injustice. According to Frederick Paulsen, author of a “Geschichte des Gelehrten Unterrichts,” he regards the “‘entire basis of artistic
education,” as given before his time, as “the work of the devil.” *® Education, he claims, ought to be founded exclusively on the Gospel.

The civil authorities are systematically invited in this work to exert pressure upon parents who are remiss in the discharge of their educational duties.

This function, moreover, should be exercised by the civil authorities in the
interests of procuring suitable candidates for the public offices, “when they

see a lad who displays ability.” Luther does not advocate universal com-

pulsory education on the part of the State. “It is unfair,” Gustav Kawerau
truly says, “to represent Luther as the harbinger of universal compulsory
education.” *¢ Neither is there any justification for the assumption that enthusiasm for the humanities and the advance of science and education in
themselves constituted the starting-point of this treatise. “The religious

viewpoints alone are the decisive ones,” remarks Julius Béhmer, a Protestant

author. Another Protestant, F. M. Schiele, says Luther was concerned with
devising a remedy for the “collapse of an educational system which had

flourished throughout Germany”—a collapse “brought about by the preach-

ing of Wittenberg.” The damage could be remedied only with great difficulty and very slowly in the course of subsequent years.

Schiele holds that the statement that “Luther’s reformation gave a gen-

eral stimulus to the schools and to education generally,” must “melt away
into nothing.” %7

Whilst various other writings of Luther may be passed over, there

is one more work of his which is deserving of mention, as it reveals

a more pleasing aspect of the man. It is his German edition of the
fables of Asop, intended for the use of school children. This work
was intended, on the one hand, to furnish a diversion from serious
thoughts; on the other, Luther sincerely desired by his edition of

ZEsop to provide the young with “the finest possible precept, admo-

nition, and instruction” adapted to their “external life in the world.”

The adaptation was couched in classical language and the indecent
55 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 21.
56 1bid., p. 8.
57 Ibid., pp. 20, 26 sq.

LUTHER’S WRITINGS AT COBURG

395

admixtures of former editions were omitted. Luther intended to make
it a “jovial and lovable, and withal a respectable and decent ZEsop.”
The projected edition was never completed. Only parts of it are
available.’® They are valuable on account of the suitable German
proverbs which the editor has inserted. In general, his works abound
in proverbs, of which he made a collection in 1535 or 1536.%°

‘Two controversial works of Luther remain to be mentioned as belonging in a certain sense to his Coburg productions. Both were directed against the diet of Augsburg and were issued soon after Luther’s return to Wittenberg, whilst he was still in an agitated frame
of mind and filled with the thoughts of his sojourn at the castle of
Coburg. They are entitled: “Warning of Doctor Martin Luther to
his Dear Germans,” and “Gloss on the Pretended Imperial Edict.”

The “Warning” ®° is directed above all else against the use of force
on the part of the Empire and the Emperor, which he believed to be
impending. Casting the most vulgar and insulting aspersions upon
the Catholic members of the diet, he advises his “dear Germans” not
to come to the aid of the papists in the event of war or insurrection.

Necessity demands, he says, that resistance be offered to every violent
attack.®l The suggestive force of this impassioned work was calculated to inflame the minds of the masses, who had embraced the new
theology, with a determination to offer stern resistance. This book
was read aloud to the mob in public squares and markets and from it

the people learned that if Dr. Martin Luther would be executed, a
large number of bishops, priests, and monks would go with him.
Luther here spoke to the masses as “the Prophet of the Germans,”
claiming that it was necessary for him to adopt this title against the
papists and asses.

In the “Gloss” 2 he proclaims with the Psalmist (XC, 13): “In

the name and calling of God I shall walk upon the lion and the asp
and trample under foot the young lion and dragon, and this ”shall
be commenced during my life and accomplished after my death. His
58 Werke, Weimar ed., Vol. L, pp. 440 54q.; Erl. ed., Vol. LXIV, pp. 349
59 Weimar ed., Vol. LI, pp. 645 saq.

sqg-

Vol. XXV, 2 ed, pp. 1 sqq.
60 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, iii, pp. 276 599 Erl. ed.,
388 sq., 391 5.5 Vol. III, pp. sq.,
pp.
I,
Vol.
Luther,
61 On the “Warning” cf. Grisar,
442 sq.; Vol. IV, p. 316.
49 sqq.
62 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, iii, pp. 331 54q:; Erl. ed., Vol. XXV, 2nd ed., pp.

396

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

self-consciousness rises to a dizzy height against the “insipid cattle
and filthy swine” who would conceal the pretended imperial edict,
which is denounced as an invalid, unjust, and surreptitious decree.
All were warned to leave untouched his principal dogma of justification by faith alone. “Thus I, Doctor Martin Luther, most unworthy
evangelist of our Lord Jesus Christ, declare that the Roman emperor,
the Turkish emperor, the Tartar emperor, the pope, all cardinals,
bishops, priests, princes, lords, the whole world and all the devils shall
leave this article stand; and in addition, they shall have the flames of
hell about their heads and no reward. This be my, Dr. Luther’s, inspiration from the Holy Ghost.” The Catholic leaders saw in this
declaration an inspiration from an entirely different source. The

quixotic exclamations in which Luther indulged at that time almost
approach the border-line of insanity. It is less difficult to understand

why Luther should invoke the nationalistic sentiments of his “dear
Germans,” for he wished to incite them against their alien oppressors, especially against “the principal rogue, Pope Clement, and his
servant, the legate Campegius.” In both of the works here under
consideration he repeats the most revolting lies about the Augsburg

diet; as, for instance, when he asserts that it was evident at Augsburg, and many admitted it, that he was in the right and that the

Catholic Church was steeped in errors, but tyrannical obstinacy had
triumphed.

Luther was most furious against Duke George of Saxony, the
protagonist of the Catholic cause, in the months following the diet.

On Easter, 1531, appeared his diatribe “Against the Assassin of Dres-

den,” which is a2 monument of hatred against a noble prince
who
remained loyal to the Emperor.%® In his published reply
to Luther’s
“Warning to his Dear Germans,” George had defended
the diet, the
empire, and Catholicism, and represented Luther as a rebel.
This forceful reply was published anonymously and is lost, except for
a few
lines which have been preserved by Cochlaeus. Another
reply directed against Luther’s “Gloss” was published by Francis
Arnoldi
under the title: “Reply to the Booklet Launch
ed by Martin Luther
against the Imperial Recess.” 8¢ Its author was a
pastor in Collen
near Meissen, who was well acquainted with
%8 Weimar ed., Vol.

XXX,

iii, pp. 446

sqq.;

Erl.

Duke George. Arnoldi’s

oils, Vol X0V,

2 @b

4

5

397

LUTHER’S WRITINGS AT COBURG

“Reply” most probably embodied some ideas suggested by the Duke.
Luther, in his libel “Against the Assassin of Dresden,” endeavored
to defend himself particularly against the charge of sedition, which
Duke George and others made against him. The word “assassin” in

the title signifies “calumniator.” But Luther is not satisfied with
defending himself; he once more attacks the “blood-hounds” of the
opposition and announces that he will continue his attacks in perpetuity. He says he had humiliated himself sufficiently, nay, too often,
and it would now be his boast that he would bubble over with invectives and imprecations against the papists. At the close he admits
that he is unable to pray without cursing. He could not utter the petition: “Hallowed be Thy Name,” without adding the words: “Accursed, damned, disgraced shall be the name of the papists and of all

who blaspheme Thy Name.” “Verily,” he says, “I1 pray thus every
day.” And he believes that God hears his prayers; for even now He has
miraculously caused “this terrible diet to come to naught.” “In spite
of all, however, I maintain a kindly, friendly, peaceable, and Christian
heart towards everybody; even my greatest enemies know this.”

which
In reply Arnoldi published an answer “To the Libel,” etc.,usly
inwas again inspired by Duke George, who had been so grievo name,
sulted by Luther. ¢ Like the first work which bore Arnoldi’s dethis one, too, is composed in a very blunt style. It was the Duke’s
ation and that
sire that free vent be given to his sentiments of indignway
of a severe
satisfaction be rendered to the maltreated Catholics by

ous revolt, the
attack upon their opponent. On account of the religi
efforts to abolish
Duke had suffered much in his duchy, despite sincere were
profoundly
the prevailing abuses. The monasteries and theeclergy
corrupted.
being
were
peopl
his
and
,
shaken by the religious revolt
animated
di,
Arnol
and
Duke
the
if
Luther had only himself to blame
nced
convi
and
e,
Empir
the
and
or
by love of the Church, the Emper
ted
imita
t
exten
in
certa
a
to
abyss,
that they were standing before an
ewhor
ds,
-houn
blood
as
ets
epith
his offensive language by using such
quotof
duty
asant
unple
the
mongers, etc. The historian cannot shirk s. There is first of a‘ll. the
ing some passages from these violent replie

quotation which Cochlaeus has preserved from the pamphlet entirely
composed by Duke George. *°

66 Cochlaeus, De actis, etc. (1565), folio 211b; Erl. ed., Vol. XXV, 2

65 Ibid., pp. 129 sqq.

ed., p. 89.

398

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE
5.

A STRONG SAXON PHILIPPIC AGAINST LUTHER

“You have entitled your work against the diet, “Warning to my
dear Germans.” It would have been more correct if you had entitled
it, Seduction and Incitement to Rebellion and Insurrection. For you

are plainly bent upon inciting the people to revolt against the Emperor and all in authority. You proceed with artful snares, with lies

and outcries, with a veritable specter of assertions. The devil is called

upon to assist you on every page. May those pass judgment on

this pamphlet who call you a living saint and say you are possessed

of the spirit of God.” Thus far Cochlaeus’ quotation from Duke

George.

The following quotations are excerpted from the other works men-

tioned above:

Your “Glosses” contain as many lies as words. You are an infamous apostate and pervert the truth when you say that the married state is prohibited

in the Catholic Church. You lie when you maintain that capital punishmen

is contemplated for those who do not use consecrated salt. You

t

lie when you

assert that Duke George of Saxony and the Elector of Brandenbu
rg promised to supply the Emperor with 5000 horses against the
Lutherans. You

lie when you aver that the Emperor is resolved to make war upon

you Lutherans for the purpose of suppressing the gospel. You lie
like a conscious,
faithless, and perjured scoundrel, when you state that the
Catholic princes
have formed a league at Dessau for the purpose of attackin
g you. Thus you
heap lie upon lie. Our princes formed a league for the
sake of preserving the
peace, only to further the welfare of their people,
and to the disadvantage

of nobody, as events have shown. You inveigh against
all papists, including the Emperor, traducing them as traitors,
miscreants, sacrilegious
blood-hounds. At the same time you falsely pretend
not to have spoken
against the Emperor or any other ruler; it is

as if one said that he intended

to produce white, but in reality produced black.

The noble-minded Emperor’s sole intention, formed

is to make order prevail in the Church.

after dye deliberation,

He will not allow priests to consort

with dissolute women. You, evil-minded apostat
e, interpret this intention in
a way which the devil in hell could not surpass
in malice.
Everyone knows that your proper sphere
is vituperation. Your scolding
against me I regard as the vaporings of
an old shrew. Your thunderous blows

do not intimidate me, but I dare tell you
the truth. If you bark at me, I
will make you spit fire like a hell-hound.
A perjured renegade ought to be

answered so that the whole world may
know his name. For it is an old
saying that a wolf-roast demands canine
sauces,

A SAXON PHILIPPIC AGAINST LUTHER

399

Hear me, Doctor Luther. I wish to propose for your consideration two
words which you apply to the princes who are opposed to you, namely, sacrileger and fool. You, dishonorable and carnal wretch, fly at your opponents
as if they were sacrilegious despoilers of churches. But who was it that sacrilegiously robbed the property of Christ, which emperors, kings, princes,
noblemen, citizens, and peasants, inspired by ardent Christian charity and

. cherishing His sacred Passion, donated of old to the monasteries, parishchurches, and altars? Verily, tell me truly, Squire Martin, Doctor Luther,
who despoiled the poor village parsons of their wretched income? Tell me,
Doctor Swinetrough (Siutrog) Luther, who despoiled God of so many thou-

sands of souls during the last twelve years and sent them to Lucifer in hell?
Alas, that arch-murderer of souls, Luther! Who robbed Christ of His spouses,
the consecrated virgins, many of whom had served God for years in the

religious life, and forced them into a miserable, wretched, and erroneous life,
so that they now run about in great want and in disgrace? Fie on you,
Martin Luther, you perjured, sacrilegious whore-master of runaway monks

and nuns, apostate priests and all apostates! Who robbed and despoiled the
Roman Emperor, that beloved, innocent flower of Christianity, Charles V,
and the kings, princes, and lords, of honor and obedience on the part of their
subjects, by spreading false, seditious, and damnable writings and doctrines?
It was you, you execrable wretch! Who is responsible for the many thieves
and rogues that now infest almost every nook and corner of the land? It is
you, Doctor Luther!

Do you not know from Holy Writ what reward is in store for robbers?

Luther, your end and reward are known only to God.

The fruits and splendors of the new gospel are to be measured by other
standards. Who among you is able to check the growing drunkenness and
marital infidelity, the insubordination towards parents and masters? How
many violations of property, what crimes of highwaymen and prowling

thieves! This is the liberty which you have given to them: these are the
noble fruits of your teaching! You owe your success to the false liberty
which you have proclaimed.

You can well afford to preach as you do, for you enjoy the support of
your government. If you had not been favorebyd the Elector, much bloodshed, revolt, and dissension, and the resurgence of all the old-time heresies
would have been avoided. Your place is the expected church council. There
you would meet men who are competent to dispute with you. But you prefer to hurl your invectives from a safe place.

You say you are obliged to speak out because you are a doctor. Now,

to
I well know the oath which the doctors of Sacred Scripture are obligedhave
You
Church.
the
with
ity
conform
in
take. It binds them to teach
violated this oath. T fear you will be promoted in a school of which the devil
is rector; for, like you, he is all bluster and tumult.

400

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

You boast of your proficiency in German. If the German style of your
speeches is so subtle, then I know doctors in the country who are quite su-

perior to you in the vehemence of their German rhetoric, especially
when

they are under the influence of strong drink. Ofttimes they beat with their
fists. If you were among them, you would not be taken for a doctor,
but
for a swine-herd. You try by the raving fire of your words to start
a conflagration; but when the fire meets a solid rock, it merely covers
it with
black soot, but cannot damage it.
You boast in your addresses that St. John Hus predicted your
coming.
Hus is holy in the same manner in which he is holy who
calls him a saint

or canonizes him, or has him prophesy about himself.
Both he and you are

archheretics. It would have been better had you disputed
with the learned

Master Erasmus of Rotterdam after he told you the
truth in his “Hyperaspistes.” He has so attuned his chords that you
could not reply. When
you cease barking, you become silent, but you
keep on sneaking about
treacherously like a mad dog.

Whilst the Peasants’ War was on, you delivere
d powerful speeches. How
many have lost their property and their lives, their
bodies and their souls, as
a result of your false, seductive writings and
your Satanic doctrines and

sermons! All the rebellious peasants who have
been slain in that war will rise
up against you on Judgment Day and exclaim
: “Woe to you!” You are an

arch-assassin of souls and bodies. You are guilty
of their death, even as Pilate
is guilty of Christ’s. It is you who are a
desperate, perjured blood-hound, not

they whom you call by this name to-day.

The whole world knows that your conscience
upbraids you day and night,
and that you can nevermore be glad and
enjoy peace of mind, even though
exteriorly you display a joyful disposition
towards your Catherine von Bora.
In ten years you have been unable to

settle in your own mind what you

will or ought to believe. You do not know

year from now—your own writings

to-day what you will believe a

prove it. You cannot come to an agree-

ment even with your own follow
ers as to whether you intend
to abide by
your present doctrines or inven
t others. As a consequence,
the poor have

become to obfuscated that they
scarcely know what to believe,
and
almost every village has seen the rise
of 2 new and distinct sect. What
pru-

dent man, therefore, would adher

join your ranks? You have writt

e to you and desert the Catholic

Church to

en that everybody ought to preac

h the

Gospel as he understands it. Now
Karlstadt, Zwingli, Bucer, Capit
o, Oecolampadius, the Anabaptists, Hubm
aier, Hut, Miintzer, and many
others have
followed your advice and prea
ched according to their own
judgment, thus

extending the misery which
you have set afoot. You ough
t to restore order
instead of continuously heapi
ng maledictions upon the papis
ts.
Hear me, you arch-blasphemer
; you admit before all the worl
d that, when
in your daily prayer you say:
“Hallowed be Thy Name!”
you are perforce

A SAXON PHILIPPIC AGAINST LUTHER

401

compelled to exclaim: *“Accursed, damned, reviled be the name of the paptists
and all blasphemers.” Who blasphemes more outrageously than you? You
boast that you are a Christian doctor and preacher. Do you not know that
Holy Scripture teaches you not to curse your enemies, but to love them for

God’s sake? You should pray for them, as Christ did when He hung upon the
cross. You curse the papacy when you utter the words: “Thy kingdom
come!”, but do not forget that no one on earth is so much opposed to the
kingdom of Christ as you are. You would dethrone Him if it were possible.

Your followers have already cast His images out of the churches and demolished them.

Your writings display the temerity and folly of a poor apostate who has
gone astray. If you want to see an arrogant fellow, behold, here is the most
arrogant of all. If you wish to see a destroyer of other people’s property, behold, here is one from whom even the property of beggars is not safe. If you
want to see an unchaste man, behold, here is one who violates the chastity of

a nun. If you want to see an agitator and a rebel, behold, here is one guilty
of a hundred thousand murders and homicides, one who despises all spiritual
and secular authority and stands convicted as a falsifier of Holy Writ.
In you we find the source of every malice, evil, sin, and infamy; an unadulterated rogue.

Had not St. Paul written of Antichrist as he did, I should believe that you
were he; but undoubtedly you are his precursor. They are right who main-

tain that Luther is certainly possessed by the devil. I believe that the whole
legion of devils which Christ drove out of the possessed and permitted to
enter into a herd of swine, is in you. As the devils made the swine so mad
that they drowned themselves in the sea: so the legion of devils has made
your monkish cranium so mad and giddy that you are unable to enjoy any
peace by day or night, until the Christians of all parties and places are be-

come confused and perplexed and finally plunged into the abyss of hell.
May you and your erring followers by the grace of God be brought back
May
to the way of truth! Would that you had a sincere desire to return!
ss
happine
eternal
and
below,
here
sins
your
for
nce
repenta
God grant you

. to us all!

excoriation
These are freely rendered extracts from the terrible the
sturdy
by
delivered against Luther from Dresden, especially
the
w?d
follo
pastor, Arnoldi, in the course of the recriminations that
iety—
propr
diet of Augsburg. The language exceeds the bounds of y—and illuswhich is pardonable because of the heat of controvers
r freely
trates the fact that those who had become indignant atallLuthe
events this
imitated the rhetorical tricks of their antagonist. At
confierce
when
age
an
of
ment
monu
ical
denunciation is a histor

402

LUTHER AT COBURG CASTLE

trasts reached their climax. Although not by any means exempt from
passion, it reveals, by its very ardor, as no description could, the ab-

horrence with which Catholic spokesmen viewed Luther, as he appeared to them in his actions and writings, and the schism produced
by him in peaceful Germany.

CHAPTER XIV

LUTHER ON THE SIDE OF THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE
—HIS TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

I. LUTHER’S CHANGE OF OPINION RELATIVE TO ARMED RESISTANCE

After the diet of Augsburg, a striking change took place in Luther’s attitude toward the question of armed resistance to the Em-

peror. The stringent measures of the “Reichskammergericht” announced in the “Abschied” of the diet against the secularization of
Catholic church property and the rigorous steps which were generally adopted against the new religion, produced a definite attitude on

~ the part of Protestants. The jurists of Electoral Saxony expressed
themselves to Chancellor Briick increasingly in favor of preparedness
and forceful resistance to the imperial mandates. Philip of Hesse, who
had formed ambitious projects against the Emperor, was prepared to
open hostilities at the first favorable opportunity and counted on the
support of all those who shared his ideas.

Luther personally would have preferred a policy of watchful
of
waiting without the use of violence. He held that the execution
imas
trated
demons
be
the resolutions adopted at Augsburg should
ul way.
possible by permitting the innovations to progress in a peacefwere
and

as they
He would have been pleased if things had been left
the new gospel.
of
time thus gained for the further propagation attit
ude—a change
However, circumstances forced him to change his of that
armed rewhich led to self-contradiction and open sanction
sistance which he had previously condemned.

permissible to meet
His former teaching had been that it was notror;
that, according
violence with violence, especially against thebeEmpe
red with Christian
to the gospel, unjust persecution was to suffe
.
resignation and in the expectation of final assistance from above

determined him to issue such
Despite his blustering, various reasonsplace
influenced by the
declarations repeatedly. In the first whic, hhehewas
oped in the
after-effects of the mystical idealismthe kingdomhadofdevel
knew only
God
h
monastery, and according to whicand
Christrue
y
ever
on;
issi
subm
lity,
a yielding disposition, humibe
dethe
but
d,”
race
disg
and
tian must allow himself to “oppressed
403

