CHAPTER XVII

PERSONAL AND DOMESTIC AFFAIRS (Continued)
I. DURATION AND WANING OF TEMPTATIONS

Luther’s vigorous, nay, coarse language was not infrequently intended by him to drown the interior scruples about his conduct and

teaching.

He called his phobias “temptations” (Anfechtungen). From 1527
to 1528, a particularly stormy period in his life, they attained to

an extraordinary intensity. After a brief calm, during his sojourn in
the castle of Coburg, the gloomy spells returned. He tells us that at
that time affliction and sadness of spirit seized him to such an extent
as to produce a contraction of the heart.! Thereupon the struggle
gradually abated. Of his serious illness during the diet of Schmalkalden, 1537, he says: “I would have died in Christ, without any
temptations and very composedly.” Recollecting this same affliction
in 1540, he said to his friends: “At the close of life, all temptations
cease; for then the Holy Spirit abides with the faithful believer, forcibly restrains the devil, and pours perfect rest and certainty into the
heart.”
He ascribed the acquisition of his strong faith to the terrible storms
he had experienced. Heretics, on the other hand—so he assures us—
were devoid of strong faith, even if they died for it; they possessed
only obstinacy, inspired by the devil.
For two weeks he experienced a “spiritual malady,” as he styles it in

1537, during which he practically lived without food and sleep. He
consoled himself, however, by having recourse to the Apostle Paul,
who was also “unable to comprehend” what was proper. When such
“spiritual temptations present themselves,” he says, “and when I
add: ‘cursed be the day on which I was born,’ then there is trouble.”
Again, in 1537, when exhausted in consequence of overwork and
indisposition, he protests that he was willing to die; for now he was
1 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 346 sqq., for the passages quoted in the text.
486

DURATION AND WANING OF TEMPTATIONS

487

“exceedingly happy and peaceful of heart.” ? Nevertheless, the fears
of the spiritual struggles at once rearose in his mind—a mental
state in which man regards God as his enemy and feels himself as if
pierced by a lance. Then “one does not know whether God is the
devil or the devil God.” 3
On October 7, 1538, he again says that he is in the throes of a
mortal agony. In this same year he complains that the devil “accused
him severely before God.” But soon after he declares that while he is
assailed by doubts and stumbles at times, this is often the case with
Christians; “even though I stumble, yet I am resolved to stand by
what I have taught.” Only fanatics, he thinks, never stumble, “they
stand firm.”

In order to overcome his phobias, Luther makes use of the most
diverse remedies, some of which have already been referred to in
this book. “Quickly inveigh against the papists,” was his slogan,

especially during temptations concerning the doctrine of justifica-

tion. He excites in himself 2 “bold anger” or some other distracting

emotion. According to his own confession, he also sought a remedy in
sexual enjoyment with his Kate and in jovial intercourse with his
friends. “A strong drink of beer,” according to his directions, is apt
to be of benefit when melancholy thoughts afflict one. Of course,
devotional and theological helps are also to be applied. “When I seize

the Bible, I have triumphed.” Only the correct text did not always
suggest itself to him or excitement rendered it lame when it was
found. The thought: “Thou shalt become a great man through temptation” was invoked, but often proved inoperative.*

The defects of his concept of faith strongly re-acted upon his
scruples and temptations. According to that doctrine, life powerfully
inspired by faith lacked sufficient support. Faith meant the acceptance
of revelation, but more frequently and aggressively, a confident trust
in God. The acceptance of revelation was made difficult for him, nay,

logically impossible by the arbitrary way in which he impugned the
books of the Bible, which form the basis of revelation.® In his interpretation of those parts of the Bible which he acknowledged as
authentic, Luther opened wide the gates of a subjectivism diametri2 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. IV, n. 4777.

8 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 352.

4 Ibid., p. 355.

5 Op. cit., Vol. IV, pp. 387 sqq.

488

PERSONAL MATTERS

cally opposed to faith.® In dealing with faith as fiduciary confidence

in the mercy of God he was exposed to the oppressive experience that,
notwithstanding his boldness, this faith was unstable in its presup-

positions. It depended on vacillating emotions. The appropriation of
the merits of Christ, the cloak of His justice, was a very difficult and
mostly unattainable matter for a conscience weighed down by guilt.
Moreover, he himself had declared that man was not free to do good,
but God alone could infuse a feeling of the possession of the merits
of Christ into the heart. But who could vouch for the operation

of God? Owing to his theory of predestination, Luther and his followers did not even know whether they were destined for eternal

punishment by the mysterious will of the Most High, despite their
acquired feeling of certitude. How, then, were doubts and disquietude
to be cured? One realizes that the temptations suffered by Luther
must have found a fertile soil in his doctrinal system.”
He confesses, in 1543, that he did not feel quite sure that his was a
steadfast, fiduciary faith, but that it still lagged behind that of
ordinary believers. “I cannot believe it,” he said in 1540, “and yet
I teach others. . . ..I know it is true, but I am unable to believe it.
. . . Oh, if only a man could believe it!” # By means of these words,
he naturally does not intend to deny his faith, but to describe the
freshness of that religious fervor which distinguishes a true Christian

and which he, in the days of his youth, had observed everywhere
among Catholics. Not a day does he waste, he writes in 1542; “but
the devil is an evil spirit . . . as I do not fail to realize day by day;
for a2 man waxes cold, and the more so, the longer he lives.”
Even in his last sermon at Eisleben, he speaks of “the sin which
still persists in us, and which compels us not to believe. We, the best
of Christians, also do the same. . . . In view of the weakness of faith,
we feel trepidation and anxiety.”

Toward the close of his life, Luther’s temptations became fewer.
At least the discussion of them becomes constantly rarer in his writings and conversations. It seems that he had succeeded, to a certain

degree, in lulling them to sleep. The application of the antidotes
which have been enumerated above, may not have been ineffectual.
6 Op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 356sqq.
7 Tischreden, Weimar cd., Vol. IV, n. 5462; Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 361.

B Tischreden, ibid., n. 4864; Grisar, op. cit.,, V, 360 sq. The following passages, ibid., pp.

361 and 368.

DURATION AND WANING OF TEMPTATIONS

489

The gymnastics of which he had made use to stifle his conscience

produced an unenviable result: lassitude and indifference appeared
- simultaneously. “Towards the close of life,” he says, “such temptations

cease, whilst other maladies remain.”

The other maladies which continued to afflict him, were his morbid
states, which at all times had co-operated with his temptations and

had at least contributed to strengthen them. His permanent heart

trouble, as is known, often resulted in precordial distress; and his
overwrought nerves exacted their tribute in the form of mental

suffering. Thus, in connection with other bodily infirmities, an intolerable psychological condition developed, namely, a tormenting

sense of fear, which restlessly sought and found an object in the unrest
of his conscience. As a result, his “temptations” often assumed an

intensity akin to that of the death agony, a phenomenon which would
hardly be capable of explanation without the presence of bodily infirmities.® Inversely, the poor man’s physical condition was undoubtedly affected by his struggles of conscience. On the other hand, he
assures us that there were frequent periods of temptation which he
sustained in a state of perfectly good health.
Without any doubt, the phobias originated not merely in disease,
as has been maintained; but disease and spiritual attacks combined
to assail his soul, and his conscience had to bear the brunt of the attack.!®
Indeed, his violent apostasy from the Catholic Church, then universally acknowledged, could not have taken place without a lengthy
and profound agitation of conscience. It cannot be repeated too

often that Luther’s terrific assault upon the papacy was inevitably
accompanied by a life of interior storm and stress, which could
scarcely be allayed, especially in a man who had enjoyed the interior

peace of the Church for so long a time. It is of such struggles of
conscience as the real objects of his temptations that the unfortunate
man speaks when he tremblingly asks himself the questions: Are
you alone gifted with understanding? Has mankind been in error
until your advent? Did the Almighty really abandon His Church and

acquiesce in her being immersed in error? Even his consciousness of
great success and the eulogies of his adherents were bound to prove
ineffectual in view of such terrible thoughts.
B1bid., V, p. 333.

10 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 321 sqq.

PERSONAL MATTERS

490

If he was less frequently assailed by storms of conscience in his

advanced years, this is due in part to the exhaustion which finally over-

powered him and which produced a certain apathy. Other dismal
features of his mental life associated themselves with this condition,

which, in its totality, constituted a truly abnormal state of soul.
2. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS

The first of the abnormal traits of Luther’s psychology was his fear

of the devil.

Numerous facts and utterances hitherto quoted attest how consciously and persistently he moved in the imaginary sphere of the

power of darkness.

Fearfully he ever beholds this power about him. As he progresses
in age, the whole world becomes more and more the “kingdom of the
devil,” as he styles it in 1544. The devil governs it and devastates it by
his tools, “the Turk, the Jew, the pope”; but, he maintains, “he shall
be under Christ to all eternity.”

Before Luther’s time popular belief in the devil had assumed an exaggerated form. It had become firmly established, especially among the
mining folk, from whom Luther descended, in consequence of the
uncanny labors which they performed within the bowels of the
earth. Even learned men were infected by this superstition. Had the
sober doctrine of Holy Writ and the Church been adhered to, the
faithful would have been preserved from many aberrations in this
sphere. Luther magnified and coarsened the maniacal ideas which his

parental home and the tendency of his age had implanted in his mind.
He confirmed this belief among the Germans, whereas, had he wished
to be a true reformer of ecclesiastical life, he would have found a
very useful field for his activity in correcting them and the other
moral diseases of his age. Up to his time, however, no one had de-

lineated the devil and his works with so much detail, no one had ad-

dressed the people on the subject with such a weight of personality
and such urgent and apparently religious instructions as Luther.
In his Large Catechism, where he speaks of the damage wrought by the
devil, he tells how Satan “breaks many a man’s neck, drives others out of

their mind or drowns them in the water”; how he “stirs up strife and brings
1 1bid., V, 275.

ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS

491

murder, sedition, and war; also causes hail and tempests, destroying the
corn and the cattle, and poisoning the air,” etc.!? In a similar vein he writes
in his Home-Postil and in his Church-Postil, where he attributes to Satan
every evil with which mankind is afflicted. His own experiences are frequently reflected in his excited ebullitions, especially when he touches upon
the demoniac fury with which his faith had been assailed. In connection
with the latter he asserts that the devil is more at home in Holy Scripture
than all the universities and scholars. “Whosoever attempts to dispute with
him,” he says, “will assuredly be pitched on the ash heap.” He is convinced

that madness is in every case due to the devil, who always employs mad men
as his instruments. How many people, he says, has the devil seized bodily,
especially when they had caused him trouble in virtue of a pact! According
to his own confession, Luther often was frightened by demons. There are

less of them at large now because they have entered into his enemies, the
heretics, Anabaptists, and fanatics. Luther has the faculty of furnishing a fertile account of the various species of devils, their habitations, and
the forms which they assume.

He is most prolix, however, in his statements and reflections on the
demons’ attitude toward himself. It is he whom the evil powers have
selected to make war upon, because of his great mission. This mania

throws him into a state of misery and mental darkness and he imagines “nightly encounters” in which he is compelled to contend with
the enemy of the Gospel; hence, all the supposed obstacles to the rapid
propagation of his religion among the papists; hence, all those remarkable phantoms which hold his mind in their powerful spell.
When, towards the end of his life, in 1546, he was compelled to
journey to Eisleben, he writes that an assembly of devils congregated

in that town in order to prevent the establishment of peace which
he contemplated.’® Indeed, he believed that he actually saw the devil,
even more plainly than at the time he sojourned in the castle of
Coburg.!* Thus, one evening, as he stood praying at the window of
his domicile, he saw the devil perched on a nearby street fountain,
jeering at him, thus insinuating that he was his sworn enemy. He
hastened to his friend, Michael Coelius, the court preacher of Mans-

he
feld, who lived in the house, and amid tears apprised him of what on
oration
funeral
his
in
t
inciden
the
s
narrate
had seen. Coelius
Luther. His physician, Ratzeberger, adds that Luther informed Coelius
12 Ibid., p. 278. The following citations ibid., pp. 279, 281, 284.

13 1bid., p. 297.

14 Op. cit., Vol. VI, p. 130.

492

PERSONAL MATTERS

and Jonas that the devil had showed him his posterior and told him
that he would achieve nothing in Eisleben.

The whole affair, naturally, was purely a hallucination. It is
reminiscent of the hallucinations which Luther had at other times, for
example, at the Wartburg and the Coburg, as a result of his excited

mental condition.

~

Once, at Wittenberg, he descried the devil in the garden beneath
his window in the shape of a huge wild boar, which disappeared when
he boldly jeered at it.!5 On the other hand, the disputation with the
devil on the Mass, as was shown above, was but a fiction of his pen.
It may be questioned whether the frequent nightly attacks launched

by Satan always occurred without hallucinations. According to his
own statement, a vulgar “Leck mich . . .”” often banished them. He

seriously states in his Home-Postil: “The devil is always about us in
disguise, as I myself have witnessed, taking, e. g., the form of a hog, of

a burning wisp of straw, and such like.” ¢
Luther was also much annoyed by witches, whom he calls “harlots of the devil.” “I wanted to burn them myself,” he says, “according to the usage of the law, where the priests commenced to stone the
guilty ones.” 17 On another occasion he declares against the female
corrupters of milk, that “the method of Doctor Pommer is the best”—
a reminiscence of the latter’s treatment of the butter-vat. Luther’s
declarations against witches, as contained in his Table Talks, became
universally known and together with his writings, which are replete
with demoniac thoughts, fatefully contributed to the bloody persecution of witches.®
Luther was very much inclined to assume that persons subject to
violent attacks of hysteria were possessed by the devil. However, he
did not wish to resort to the customary ecclesiastical exorcism with

its commands addressed to the devil, but restricted himself to prayer.

“God knows the time when the devil must depart.” The success of
prayer, however, usually appeared rather dubious.
In January, 1546, he experienced a peculiar encounter with the supposed
devil in the sacristy of the parish church of Wittenberg. In the presence of
16 Ibid., pp. 131 sq.
18 1bid., VI, 132.
17 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. IV, n. 3979.
18 N. Paulus, Hexenwahn und Hexenprozess, vornebmlich im 16. Jabrbundert (1910),
pp. 488 sqq.

ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS

493

several doctors, ecclesiastics, and students, the devil was to be driven out of
a girl of eighteen, a native of Ossitz, near Meissen, by the prayers of Luther
and his attendants. It is evident from the accounts of two participants that
the girl was in a highly hysterical condition. These two witnesses are Frederick Staphylus, a future convert to Catholicism, and Sebastian Froschel,

Luther’s deacon. When, after the recitation of a somewhat lengthy prayer,
Luther noticed no sign of the devil’s departure, he applied his foot to the
patient to signify his disdain for the devil. The poor creature whom he had

thus insulted, followed him with threatening looks and gestures. The door
could not be opened, as it had been bolted, and the key mislaid. Since the
window, which was bolted with iron bars, did not permit of escape, Luther,
the devil’s greatest and best-hated foe on earth, says Staphylus, “ran about

hither and thither, seized with fright,” constantly pursued by the infuriated
girl, and writhed and deported himself like a person in despair. Finally the
sacristan passed in a hatchet, with which Staphylus burst open the door, and
thus liberated Luther from his desperate plight. The pious Froschel says that

afterwards reports came to Wittenberg to the effect that the evil spirit no

longer tormented the girl, as formerly.*®

Luther’s expectation of the end of the world is another dark trait
which pervades his life and assumes a more vivid hue in his later
years. He makes various estimates as to when the end may be ex-

pected.2 On one occasion he says it will come in fifty years. Then
again he predicts that the catastrophe will have happened by 1548.
“We shall yet experience the fulfillment of the Scriptures.” The idea
circulated widely. His eccentric pupil and friend, Michael Stiefel,
despite Luther’s opposition, anticipated the date by assigning the year
1533, the eighteenth of October, at exactly eight o’clock in the morning, as the date of the world’s end. At this hour he assembled his trem-

bling parishioners in church, and, as nothing happened, was severely
censured by Luther.
The end of the world was frequently predicted by other, even by
accompax.lied
great, men. In Luther’s case, however, the expectati.on isfrom
the idea
s
spring
It
oms.
sympt
by unusual agitation and morbid
, and
papacy
the
in
rist
of his vocation and success. He revealed Antich
iimmed
ed
follow
be
to
was
¢his revelation, according to the Bible,
in
fort.h
sets
.he
y
theor
This
.
ately by the advent of the Great Judge

detail and with the greatest seriousness in his tract against Catharinus,
19 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 137 5q.
20 Op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 242, 248.

PERSONAL MATTERS
494
appealing to the celebrated passage of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Thes-

salonians and the misunderstood prophecy of Daniel.
There is something visionary about his proclamations concerning

the end of the world, and for this reason they deserve closer con:

sideration.?!

Many signs in nature, human society, and the empire of Satan, he

held, announced the end of the world, as did also the ever increasing
brutalization of the masses and the upper classes. In his fantastic in-

terpretation of the monk-calf, he adduces the horrors of the papacy
in corroboration of his prophecy. In old age he says of himself: “Let
the Lord call me hence, I have committed, seen, and suffered sufficient
of evil.” At that time he was able to find even a certain consolation
in reflecting on the end of the world, and to speak of the “dear
Judgment Day,” which was to liberate him from the difhculties which
surrounded his work, and from the struggles within his own soul. The

great successes which he finally experiences, appear to him to signify
the last flaring up of the light. “The light is approaching extinction;
it still makes a mighty effort, but thereafter it will be extinguished in
a twinkle.” Oppressive dreams of the impending judgment visit him.
He overcomes the impression by hoping vigorously and longing for his
departure from this vale of tears. Thus a mixture of dread and consolation, of fear and satisfaction is prevalent in his expectation of the
end of the world.
So sure is he in his calculations that, in view of the brevity of time
still allotted, he does not concern himself particularly about the discipline of the Church in the future, e. g., about the institution and
order of public worship.??
The spiritual exhaustion which overwhelmed him towards the end

of his life had a share in this indifference. It also belongs to the dark
side of his spiritual life. Luther exclaims in his apathy: “Let everything collapse, stand, perish, as it may. Let matters take their course
as they are, since, after all, matters will not change. . . . Germany
has had its day and will never again be what it once was.” Thus he
writes in 1542.%% He is “tired of this life,” he writes in the same year;
21 For proofs of the following ibid., pp. 242sqq. Gf. the passages
Tischreden, Weimar ed., index to Vol. VI, 5. v. “Tag, jiingster.”

22 Cfr. Késtlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. s22.

cited by

Kroker,

|

*31In a letter to the preacher Probst at Bremen, on March 26, 1542. Briefwechsel, XIV,
P 218; Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 226; the following passages, ibid., pp. 230 sq.,
246
sqq.

ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS

495

“all thoughts concerning plans and rendering aid begone from me!
All is vanity.” And again in 1543: “We will let things take their
course as they may.” He regards his words: “Let happen what may”

as inspired by Christ, who will seize the reins Himself. The ailments,

too, which he suffered, contributed to this despondency. He was

afflicted alternately by oppression of the heart and by violent and
whirling sensations in the head, accompanied by a ringing in the
ears, and by sufferings caused by gallstone and other maladies.
“Distemper, melancholy, and severe afflictions,” says Ratzeberger,
oppressed him. This physician believes that the mental sufferings
which Luther sustained contributed to his death.** Luther is pro-

foundly grieved at his inability “to proceed effectively” against the
papists, “so great is the immensity of the papistic monster.” 25 He
sees the advent of the Tridentine Council and he execrates and curses
it.26 With avidity he gives credence to the fable that the Emperor and
the Pope had despatched ambassadors to the Grand Turk with gifts

and an offer of peace, ready to prostrate themselves before the infidel
ruler in long Turkish garments. He says that this is “a token of
the coming of the end of all things.” *” Indeed, in the disturbed
state of his mind he believed the most incredible things. He felt that

he was repeatedly saved from the danger of being poisoned by the
papists, who pursued him with deadly intent. He preached in poisoned
pulpits without injury to himself. Witches endeavored in vain to
destroy him and his family. Hired incendiaries convulsed the districts

which adhered to him; but the devil raved in vain.

Dissatisfaction with Wittenberg finally induced him to abandon
that city forever. Although he had bidden adieu to his Wittenberg
hearers on a former occasion, and although he wanted to depart from
the ungrateful city in the beginning of 1544, he did not carry out

his plan until the end of July, 1545. After careful preparation 2 he
betakes himself to Zeitz, whence he addresses a letter to his wife, declaring that he will never come back and requesting her to return to
the estate of her family at Zulsdorf and to restore the Black Monastery

old
to the Elector. He says he is resolved to beg for his bread in hisconhe
age. From Zeitz he repairs to Merseburg, where, on August 2,
24 Grisar, op. cit.
25 1bid., IV, 344.
26 [bid.
27 Ibid.
28 1bid., pp. 341 s4g.

496

PERSONAL MATTERS

fers upon the canon of the cathedral chapter, George von Anhalt, a
so-called ordination as bishop of the diocese that had been abolished

by Duke August of Saxony. From Merseburg he proceeds to Leipsic,

where he preaches on the twelfth of August. He was prevailed upon
to return to Wittenberg only after most strenuous efforts put forth
by Melanchthon and Bugenhagen, who had been appointed emissaries

of the city, the University, and the Elector.
After his return he felt better for a while. Owing to the devotion
shown him by his followers, his mental depression yielded to a lively
spirit of enterprise. It was a sudden transition, such as not infrequently
occurred in his interior life, an idiosyncrasy of psychopathic sufferers.?? The enemies were made to sense the old Luther in the new
polemical literature which he produced. But melancholia once more
returned, though apparently not accompanied by his former temptations.

Because of his suspicion of the teaching of others, association with
him is described as intolerable, since he always suspected deviations
from his own doctrinal position and would brook no differences of
opinion. Melanchthon, who held different opinions on various points,
e. 8., on the Eucharist, complained bitterly and wrote afterwards that
he was forced to put up with “an ignominious servility” in his association with Luther. He compares himself with the unfortunate
Prometheus chained to the rock and describes Luther as the demagogue
Cleon and the impetuous Hercules.3? Forced to linger, as it were, in
the cave of Cyclops, and not feeling secure against the secret wrath

of Luther, he also desired to leave Wittenberg and announced his

readiness “to slink away”—such is his expression.?!
One particularly prominent trait in the spiritual life of Luther is

his extraordinary capacity for self-delusion. The inward necessity of
continually justifying anew to the world, and no less to himself, his
pretended calling, the overwhelming ambition of belittling his
antagonists and augmenting the number of his own followers and,

29 John Joseph Mangan, in Life, Character, and Influence of Desiderius Erasmus
of

Rotterdam

(1927), at pp.

87-88

of volume

two, makes

the

following observations on

Luther, which confirm Father Grisar’s position. He says: “As
our study of Erasmus has
led us to decide definitely that he was a neurasthenic, so our
study of Luther has convinced us that he was a psychopath, if not always, then
most assuredly at intervals.”’—
The author advances a number of proofs in substantiation
of his assertion, which appear

very interesting, as some of them are based upon
medical observations.

30 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 252 sqg.
31 1bid., VI, 347.

(Tr.)

ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAITS

497

finally, his inevitable and constant perplexities, resulted in most curious expressions of self-delusion, which sometimes contradicted the
views he entertained at other times.

Thus the moral corruption developing under the new evangel on occasion
would appear terrible to him only because the gospel which he preached was
pure and holy, and light intensifies the shadows. As there is no light in the
papacy, he contends, its horrible evils and vices are not so noticeable. He as-

cribes the corruption of his followers to the devil, who would discredit the
evangel, but on other occasions admits that it was caused by his solsa fides
doctrine which implied the inefficacy of good works.*
A few examples will show how arbitrarily his mental processes contravened the ordinary laws of experience and the rules of logic, in order to

conform with the idea of his vocation, which dominated him with morbid
force.

God continuously performs miracles in confirmation of his doctrine. In
response to the prayers of the Lutherans, He destroys the enemies of His
teaching. “By my prayers I have brought about the death of Duke George

of Saxony; by means of our prayers we intend to encompass also the death of
others.” With the greatest apparent naiveté he finds his doctrines confirmed
by the ancient doctors of the Church, such as St. Augustine, whereas in
matter of fact they state the exact contrary. He cannot comprehend why
the whole world does not agree with him and says that malice alone prevents the papists from accepting what is so evidently right; or, rather, they
accept it in secret, as the pope and the Roman curia do, but they do not
wish to honor him and the truth. The most horrible infidelity is rampant

under the papacy. The papists do not heed “that God incessantly attacks
them with many wounds, plagues, and signs.” Has He not confirmed the
Lutheran religion by the sudden death of Zwingli?
I am in duty bound to proclaim to the world what I “feel inwardly

by God
through the spirit of God.” Indeed, I permit myself to be guided
din of
the
and
ion
Opposit
ship.”
e3s the wind and the waves propel the
’
Peasants
the
In
work.
my
on
tion
approba
battle are but the seal of divine
peasthe
that
m
proclai
to
him
nded
comma
God
that
d
War he boldly asserte
rds vouches,
ants were to be slain like dogs. In a spirit of defiance he afterwa“by
the first
abide
will
he
with regard to his whole doctrinal system, that
of the
ruits
“firstf
the
by
high,”
on
mandate of the vocation received from

ce the contrary” (!)
received spirit,” even «if God or Christ should announ
y over the papacy
He may not yield, since, in his own imagination, his victor
by the
destro
is already assured. “This majesty has fallen,” “‘it hhaswillbeenbe withouyed”
pope.”
a
t
*spirit of the mouth of the Lord.” “The Churc
32 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 2105qq:; Vol. VI, pp. 3315sq.

498

PERSONAL MATTERS

since he will fall just as the Turk. “Even now he is singing Eli, Eli,” because
he has been struck. Soon men will say, Expiravit—"he has breathed his
last.” “My adversaries will have neither the Word nor the Cross.” They all
avoid the Cross.

“Here I, 2 poor monk, and a poor nun must come to the rescue.

We two comprehend the article of the Cross and raise it up; for this
reason the Word and the Cross are sufficient; they give us assurance.”

Thus the series of illusions outlined above is concluded with the
remarkable tableau showing how Luther and his Kate raise up the
the Cross in the sight of the world—they who had bound themselves
by a solemn vow before the altar of God to embrace His Cross in a
life of voluntary chastity, poverty, and obedience. How different the
reality! To what extent the Cross disappears in Luther’s conception
of the married state and sexual life will be seen in a subsequent
section.

3.

FROM

FREEDOM TO VIOLENT INTOLERANCE

The reversion of his early attitude on religious liberty and spiritual
independence also belongs to the remarkable features of Luther’s later

life. This contradiction must be emphasized because rationalist Protestants of the present time like ta quote Luther’s earlier utterances,

which seem to imply the destruction of all positive Christian belief.3?
It is well known that Luther by no means intended to substitute

rationalism for revealed Christianity. Nevertheless, in the first years of
his polemics he advanced to such an extent in his antagonism to Catholic doctrine as apparently to antagonize all dogma. Relative to prac-

tice, he at that time permitted the obligation and dignity of the law
to recede in an unwarranted manner. It is known that the liberty
of
opinion which emerged in consequence, and the loose morals of his

adherents, as disclosed especially by the visitations of 1 527—-1528, led
him to employ greater caution. The law and the fear of divine
chastisement were inculcated by him more strictly, and
belief in the

revealed doctrines which he regarded as certain was
great severity. The controversy with Zwingl

emphasized with

i caused Luther to draw

up a formal series of articles of faith. The Augsb

urg Confession fur-

33 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. V, n. $SES,

VIOLENT INTOLERANCE

499

nished a certain basis, which was afterwards expanded and sanctioned
by the publication of the so-called Schmalkaldic Articles. The controversy aroused by the Antinomianism of Agricola once more re-

stored the law to its legitimate position and set new limits to liberty
of teaching. Present-day Protestant theologians speak of a restriction

of teaching and doctrinal torpidity on the part of the aging Luther.
Many would prefer to progress along the path which he blazed in
his early career as a reformer, holding that a healthy evolution can

only take place where there is complete freedom, and lamenting that
Luther’s promising spring was succeeded by no summer.**
It is not true, however, that Luther’s declarations in favor of liberty ceased altogether in his later years, His principle of the untram-

meled formation of a personal religious conviction on the part of
each individual in accordance with his private interpretation of the
Bible, was never abandoned. After he had rejected the teaching
authority of the Church, instituted by God for the preservation of
dogma, there was really nothing left for him to do but to uphold
an unlimited subjectivism. He contradicts himself, therefore, when he

demands unconditional adherence to an objective sum of truths. All
the more so, as he boldly sets up his own personal opinions in place of
the venerable authority of the Church. True, he tried to conceal this
substitution as much as possible. He assures his adherents that they
must follow Christ, not him, but at the same time proceeds, in part

unconsciously, on the assumption that his mandates must be obeyed.
But, it may be asked, where is the necessary guarantee of truth if his

judgment, hence the view of one person, is to be depended upon as to

what constitutes the teaching of Christ, and what part of the ancient
teaching and revelation is to be retained in the prescribed articles of
the new evangel?

The reversions to a more positive attitude, occasionally noticed
is
in Luther, were, therefore, fundamentally only a more brutal emphas
change
the
him
of the Wittenberg doctrine, which was his own. For
was a necessity; and even though it appears as grossly inconsistent, it

tantism by
nevertheless redounded to the future benefit of Protes
until the
ies,
assisting it in carrying on during the coming centur
so-called historical
scepticism of a new era and the advent of the shook
Lutheranism
method and the modern spirit of independence
with destructive force.

84 Grisar, op. cit.,, Vol. VI, pp. 237 sqq.

500

PERSONAL MATTERS

In his tribunal at Wittenberg Luther strove to protect his #ruth
by all means. He hurled the most violent invectives not only at the

papists, but also at the ‘“heretics” in his own camp, who dared to
deviate from his theological teaching. He assails not only the Zwing-

lians, but also Karlstadt, Bucer, Capito, Grickel (Agricola) and Jeckel
(Jacob Schenck) among many others.
“They are knaves,”

thus he inveighs against them. “They would readily
assail and surprise us, just as if we were blind and ignorant of their
methods.” ** “By God’s grace I am more learned than all the sophists
and
theologians of the schools.” But “they have a high opinion of themselves
,
which, indeed, is the cause and well-spring of all heresies, for, as St. Augus3

tine says, “Ambition is the mother of all heresies.” ” “It all comes
from obstinacy and conceit and the ideas of natural reason, which puffs
itself up.”

Whilst in this frame of mind, it appears to have been impossibl
e for
Luther to realize that he actually condemned himself by these
declarations
uttered at various times.

The heretics—he says on another occasion—cannot be sure of their cause.

First of all, they ought “to be certain of their mission.” “One
ought to be
certain of it before God, whilst by all means one ought
to be able to say
before the people: ‘If anyone knows better, let him say
so; I will gladly
yield to God’s Word when I am better instructed.’

He asks them: Where are your miracles? With 2 boldness
that is truly

extraordinary he demands miraculous signs from the
sectaries. He himself

needs none in attestation of his teaching; for his mission is

an ordinary one,

whereas their pretended mission is extraordinary. Were
he to petition God,
he says, God would endow him with “the gift of
raising the dead, or of
performing other miracles.” However, he does not
ask God for these gifts,
since “the rich gift of interpreting the Scriptures
is sufficient” for him.

In his reaction against the doctrinal liberty which he himself
inaugurated Luther goes so far as to advocate compulsory
measures against
those who differ with him. In 1525 he had enuncia
ted the principle:
“The [secular] authorities are not to hinder anyone
from teaching
and believing what he pleases.” 3¢ In 1§ 3o—originall
y induced thereto
by the agitation of the Anabaptists—he demands
the exercise of force
and bloody repression on the part of his Elector
and the other
Protestant rulers. Not only are those Anabaptists
who rebel against

the authority of the State to be dealt with harshl

y, but also those who

85 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. III, n.
2896b. The other passages cited in small
print
will
be found apnd Grisar, op. cit.,, Vol.
VI, pp. 279 sqq.

36 This and the following quotations

ibid., VI, pp. 248 sqq.

VIOLENT INTOLERANCE

501

are not in rebellion. “These also are not to be tolerated, but are to
be treated as public blasphemers.” To deviate from his teaching is
equivalent to “public blasphemy” and deserving of death. “The authorities shall hand over knaves of that ilk to their proper master, to

wit, Master Hans” (i. e., the hangman). The Sacramentarians and the
papists, too, being blasphemers, must not be tolerated.
At the end of October, 1531, Melanchthon, who was known for his

humane disposition, developed in detail the reasons for employing the
sword against the Anabaptists. These reasons apply to all who “reject
the office of public preaching and teach that men can become holy
in some other manner, without sermons and ecclesiastical worship.”

Luther subscribed his name to these reasons, saying, “It pleases me.”
In his sermons on St. Matthew, which were delivered about this time,
he says: “It is not allowed to everyone to excogitate his own ideas,
formulate his own doctrine, permit himself to be called Master and
dominate or censure anyone else”’; “it is one of the greatest and most
injurious vices on earth, whence all factious spirits originate.”

Thus sectaries, especially Anabaptists, were executed in Electoral
Saxony, the rulers appealing to the Wittenberg theologians and jurists
in justification of their procedure.?” Luther never revoked his intolerant views; on the contrary, he constantly intensified them as he
approached the end of his life.?®

Certain formidable barriers which had been erected by him and
Melanchthon at the faculty of Wittenberg, were intended to safeguard this supreme tribunal and citadel of pure orthodoxy against

¢he incursions of “heretical” opinions. The statutes of the theological
faculty, which were probably drawn up in 1533, invested that body
with the right of deciding all matters of faith. The proper observ-

ance of this provision was guaranteed by the fact that Luther presided
over the faculty uninterruptedly from 1535 until his death.3® Moreover, after 1535, there was prescribed, at the instigation of the Elecation,
tor, an “Ordination Oath,” preceded by a theological examincertifi
-

In the
for all preachers and pastors sent out by the University.
and signed
1540,
cate of ordination of Heinrich Bock (dated May 17,
by Luther, Bugenhagen, Jonas, and Melanchthon) it is set forth that
.

38 Ibid., pp. 256 sqq. Cfr. N. Paulus, Protestantismus und Toleranz im 16. Jabrbundert

37 Ibid., pp. 254 5q.

(1911), Ch. L

39 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 262 sq.

§02

PERSONAL MATTERS

Bock had undertaken to “preach to the people steadfastly and faithfully the pure doctrine of the gospel which our Church confesses.”
It is also stated that he adheres to the “consensus” of the “Catholic
Church of Christ.” 4° “Catholicity” here is understood in a sense
which does not ordinarily attach to the word. “Ordination” merely
consisted in the declaration that the candidates were authorized to
serve as ministers.

Naturally many opponents within his own camp reproached Luther

with lack of liberty in the exercise of the ministry. They charged,
and not without justification, that the Wittenbergers proposed ‘“to

breathe new life into despotism, to seat themselves in the chair, and

to exercise jurisdiction just as the pope had done heretofore.” 4

Luther was dubbed “the Pope of Wittenberg” (Pspa Albiacus), an
epithet which became increasingly popular when his talented and
scholarly opponent, Sebastian Franck, whose writings enjoyed a wide
circulation, developed Luther’s subjectivism to its logical conclusions
and combated the Lutheran ecclesiastical system, demanding unrestricted liberty. This intrepid challenger was everywhere pursued by
verdicts and demands for execution on the part of Luther and
Melanchthon.*? Simon Lemnius (Lemchen), a Protestant humanist
of

Wittenberg, was another public opponent of Luther’s theologic
al
despotism. Banished from Wittenberg in 1538, he avenged himself
by
the publication of 2 caustic “Apology,” the complete text of which
became known to historians but recently. In it he unmerci
fully
castigates the spiritual tyranny exercised by Luther. “He
sits like a
dictator at Wittenberg and rules”; thus the “Apology,” *“and
what
he says must be taken as law.” 48 However, it must be
noted that

Lemnius, because of other attacks upon the conduc

t of Luther’s cir-

cle, did not bequeathe to posterity the reputation
of a respectable
controversialist, his attacks being very frivolous
in diction and content and also untrue. He composed a revolting
poem in which he
qepicts Luther as .sufi’erin'g from dysentery.
Luther retorted with a
“Merd-Song” of his own, in which he paid his
respects to Lemnius in
language that was no less vulgar than his opponent’s.4+
In spite of such attacks Luther maintained his tribuna
l at Witten40 1bid,, p. 265.
411bid., p. 313.
42 1bid., pp. 266 sqq.
48 1bid., p. 288.
44 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. IV,
n. 4032.

:

Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 288.

VIOLENT INTOLERANCE

503

berg. “Whosoever shall despise the Wittenberg School,” he declared,
“is a heretic and an evil man; for in this school God has revealed His
Word.” 5 And he adhered to this solemn pronouncement. In 1542 he
went so far as to demand that the leading citizens of Meissen, who
had embraced his doctrine, should “signify their approval of everything which has hitherto been done by us and shall be done in the
future.” 48

Luther’s intolerance also animated his co-workers, especially Melanchthon.*” A. Hinel in the Zeitschrift fiir Rechtsgeschichte passes
the following judgment upon the latter: As far as Protestantism is
concerned, “liberty of belief”” was ““denied at every point.” In fervent

words Melanchthon sanctioned the execution of the “heretic” Michael
Servetus by Calvin in 1554 as “a pious and memorable example for
all posterity.” 48 It has been previously noted that he wished God
would send a “bold assassin” to ‘““despatch” the heretical King Henry
VIII of England.® Martin Bucer, to mention but one more of Luther’s

associates, asserted that the civil authority “was obliged to abolish
false doctrine and perverse public worship,” and that all the bishops

and the clergy must obey it as the sole existing authority.5°
The new religion was, as a matter of course, capable of enforcing

such demands only by availing itself of its intimate connection with
the secular authority. By surrendering the religious discipline to the
civil government, the Protestant Church became a compulsory State
institution, a nursery of despotic encroachments upon the spiritual
domain. Luther himself says of it: *“Satan is still Satan; under the
papacy he pushed the Church into the world sphere and now, in our
day, he seeks to bring the State system into the Church.” **

The Church, whose invisibility and purely spiritual power Luther
had hitherto so forcibly emphasized, in his hands became a visible institution, which asserted its visibility all too strongly, and became
accustomed to marshal all temporal forces and to insure its preservation with the aid of the secular arm. The tragic fate of Luther’s theory
48 Tischreden, ibid., n. §126; Grisar, op. cit., Vol. V, p. 170.

48 Grisar, ibid., VI, p. 279.
47 1bid., p. 265.

48 Grisar, op. cit.,, VI, pp. 266 sqq.
49 Grisar, op. cit., VI, pp. 269 sqq.

80 Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 12. Respecting Melanchthon, Bucer, etc., see the proofs in Paulus,

Toleranz.

51 Grisar, op. cit., Vol. VI, p. 320.

504

PERSONAL MATTERS

of the Church has led many a Protestant scholar to assert, quite truly,

that there is no room for a church in Luther’s system. It is even
doubted whether he intended to found a church in any true sense of
the word.?? Protestants have frankly exposed the inherent contradiction between his pronouncements on religious authority and the duty
of secular rulers and his persistent assertion of individual liberty and
the claims of his gospel.53

Luther’s retreat from the position which he had originally assumed
merely contributed to a clearer disclosure of the contradictions inherent in the principal ideas of his system. The intrinsic contradictions
are especially manifest in the sphere of morality. For this reason,

we will devote a special chapter to the ethical aspects of Luther’s
doctrine and practice.
52 Ibid., p. 307, quoting Martin Rade.
53 Ibid., pp. 321 sq. Cfr. Th. Pauls, Luthers Auffassung von Staat und Volk, Bonn, 1925,

a book which unjustifiably credits Luther with too much systematization.

CHAPTER XVIII

LUTHER ON MORALITY AND MATRIMONY. THE
BIGAMY OF PHILIP OF HESSE
I. LUTHER’S ETHICAL TEACHING IN GENERAL

The ethical system of Luther was vitally influenced by his conception of the gospel, which in his opinion was essentially only forgiveness of sin, a cloak covering guilt, the quieting of an “affrighted
conscience.” To gain' a sense of confidence was the starting-point of

the new doctrine. Luther’s supreme gain was to acquire certainty of
salvation through an active faith in the appropriation of the merits of
Christ. This thought is the guiding star also of his ethics.

Protestants say that Luther erected ethics upon its genuine foundation, which had been ignored up to his time. This claim, however, is
disproved by certain leading declarations of his, which raise the question how a true ethical system could originate under such conditions.
Luther taught that man is not a free agent, but 2 mute “pillar of

salt,” either controlled by the grace of God which is operative within
him, or subject to the domination of the devil, without any activity
on his part. His reason in religious matters resembles a lunatic.” In
consequence of an ineradicable original guilt, sin persists in man’s

inordinate concupiscence; even the just man, i. e., he who is regarded
as just by God, remains a sinner. Sin is merely covered up by fiduciary

faith in the blood of Christ. The “golden cloak of grace” due to the
merits of the Redeemer does everything. Good works are devoid of

supernatural merit and have no significance for Heaven. Every man

is predestined for Heaven or hell by a hidden decree of God.
It is fair to ask: What moral inducement is there in Luther’s hypothesis to combat the perversity of human nature? Is there any moral
responsibility? Can there be any such thing as Christian morality? At

a time when the renown of Luther was not so great as it is since the
last decades of the nineteenth century, the Protestant theologian K.
F. Stiudlin openly declared that “no genuine Christian ethic could
1 Cfr. Grisar, Lather, Vol. V, pp. 3 sqq.
’

50§

