CuarTER VIII

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)
I. LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE

THE

EMPIRE

After Luther had been put under the ban, Pope Leo X addressed an
earnest letter to Charles V, in which he demanded that those vested

with the proper authority should execute its secular effects.
The diet of Worms had been convoked for January 6, 1521. Elector Frederick of Saxony, ever intent upon delaying the trial of

Luther, proposed that Luther be permitted to come to Worms
for a hearing before the diet. In a letter to Spalatin the rebellious

monk expressed his willingness to make the journey.! But the opposition of the party loyal to the Church, especially that of Cardinals

Aleander and Caraccioli, the papal nuncios attending the diet, the
Elector, and subsequently also the Emperor, temporarily abandoned
this plan. When Luther was apprised of this decision, he expressed his
displeasure (cum dolore legi); for he sedulously strove to create the
impression that he had not been accorded an adequate hearing. His

fancy was charmed by the prospect of appearing on the world stage

at Worms. How much could he not expect in furtherance of his
cause from a courageous testimony given there in the presence of
the empire! What had he to fear, protected as he was by an imperial
safe-conduct and the support of his friends among the knights?

Courage and presumption he possessed in a plentiful measure.?

Luther’s opponents at the diet did not tarry in beginning opera-

1 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 24. Luther here solemnly advises Spalatin (and through him
the
Elector) of the dedication of his life to the cause he had espoused.
2On the preliminaries and Luther’s appearance at the diet of Worms see Kalkoff,
Luther
und die Entscheidungsjahre, 1917, pp. 187 sqq., and the same author’s
Der Wormser
Reichstag, 1922. Many of Kalkoff’s assertions, however, are questionable.
Cf. in addition H.
v. Schubert, Quellen und Forschungen iiber Luther euf dem
Reichstag zu Worms, 1899,
A shorter but more reliable description in Janssen-Pastor, Geschichte
des deutschen Volkes,

Vol. II, a0th ed., pp. 173 sqq. See also Grisar, Lutherstudien, No.
1: Luther z Worms,

pp. il sqq.

180

:

etc.

LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE THE EMPIRE

181

tions against him, On Ash-Wednesday, February 13, Aleander delivered an oration, which lasted three hours and was received with
applause. He recommended that the papal Bull of excommunication

be promptly enforced. Among other things he pointed out that the

Saxon innovator had rebelled also against imperial statutes, and that
his agitation enkindled insurrection and civil war. At the conclusion
of the address, Charles V declared his intention to proceed at once,
and added that it was neither necessary nor expedient to grant Luther
a hearing. This was the correct point of view; for after the definitive
judgment of the Holy See, the diet was incompetent to reopen the
case, especially before the secular authority. If there was merely a
question whether Luther recanted or not, this could be decided in
the diet without summoning him. Luther himself stated that it
was not necessary for him to leave Wittenberg solely for this purpose.

Notwithstanding the activity of Cardinal Aleander to keep the excommunicated monk away from Worms, some members of the diet
were in favor of giving him a hearing. This sentiment was nourished
by the approval which Luther’s pronouncements against the oppressive papal taxation and the Roman procedure in the bestowal of benefices met with in the assembly. The upshot of this dissatisfaction appears in the “grievances” (gravamina) voiced by the diet.

On February 19, the estates requested the Emperor to permit
Luther to appear at Worms, not, indeed, for the purpose of disputing
with him about religion, but that his recantation might be demanded
by experts appointed for this purpose. In the event of his recantation,
it was intended to interrogate him “about other points and matters.” If, however, he refused to recant, the Emperor was to issue a

suitable mandate ® declaring the concurrence of the empire in the

papal ban with its penalties.

In consequence of this request of the estates, the Emperor cited
Luther to appear in Worms, March 6, 1521.* The citation was handed
to him at Wittenberg, on March 26, by Caspar Sturm, the imperial
herald, who had orders to escort Luther to the diet. An imperial letter

of safe-conduct for the journey to and from the diet was issued,® for
8 Deutsche Reichstagsakten unter Karl V., édited by A. Wrede, Vol. II, Gotha, 1869, pp.

316 sqq. Cf. Janssen-Pastor, op. cit., p. 197.
4 Briefwechsel, 11, pp. 101 sq.
8 Ibid., pp. 103 sq.

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

182

which reason the summons stated that he had to fear no violence or
injustice.

Before he started on his journey, Luther forwarded the printed

commencement of his explanation of the Magnificat to the future
Elector, Duke John Frederick, who was very favorably inclined
towards him, and to whom
he had dedicated this work. He also wrote
an exhortation to Wenceslaus Link on the completion of the latter’s

violent diatribe against the Italian Dominican, Ambrosius Catharinus,
who had vigorously attacked him. Then, clad in the habit of his Order, and firmly resolved not to recant, Luther confidently set out,
on April 2, on his famous visit to the city of Worms.
His adherents saw to it that a welcome was extended to him everywhere. His journey almost assumed the proportions of a triumphal
procession. At Erfurt he preached to a great concourse of people on
his newly discovered way of salvation. “What matters it,” he exclaimed, “if we commit a fresh sin, so long as we do not despair, but
remember that Thou, O God, still livest. Christ, my Lord, has destroyed sin; then at once the sin is gone.” ® When, owing to the overcrowded condition of the church, the galleries cracked and a panic
ensued, he forthwith adjured Satan and blamed his spite for the disturbance. A chronicler ascribes the restoration of quiet to Luther’s
powerful command to the devil and says it was the “first miracle”
performed by the man of God. During his sermon at Gotha, the
devil cast stones from the gable of the church. According to a letter
to Spalatin, written in Frankfort, Luther likewise attributed to the
devil a severe illness from which he suffered and which seemed to
threaten the continuation of his journey. What was more serious,
however, was the news which reached him on the way of an edict
which the Emperor had issued concerning his books, that they were to

be delivered up to the authorities everywhere. This made Luther realize that the Emperor was resolved on intervention. He said later that
this realization caused him to tremble with fear. From Oppenheim

he addressed a letter-to Spalatin, who had cautioned him; he said he
would go to Worms, even if the devils were as numerous in that town
as the tiles on the roofs.” At that time he also wrote: “We shall enter
to

B Grisar, Lutber‘, Vol. 1L, p. 339; Vol. III, p. 180. Cf. the section on Luther’s journey
Worms and

his appearance at the imperial

Kawerau, I, p. 407.

T Briefwechsel, 111, p. 120.

diet,

ibid., I, pp.

379

sqq., and Kostlin-

LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE THE EMPIRE

183

Worms in spite of all the gates of hell and all the powers of the
air.”8 In a tavern at Frankfort he was in such high spirits that he
played the lute in the presence of many guests. His opponent Cochlzus afterwards ridiculed this incident and .aid that here one had an
occasion to see Orpheus perform in cowl and tonsure.
At Worms there was a party, centered around the Emperor’s con-

fessor, a Franciscan friar by name of John Glapion, who veered to
and fro between the papal nuncio and the declared friends of
Luther relative to the latter’s trial. Glapion wanted Luther to appear
before him at the castle of Ebernburg, instead of the diet in Worms.
Luther’s friend Bucer was instructed to try to induce him at Oppenheim to acquiesce in this proposal. Luther, however, refused to
abandon his journey to Worms, particularly since he had been apprised of the plot which the revolutionary knights had formed

against Worms and the diet in the extreme case that violence should

be offered to his person.

In the forenocon of April 16, the flourish of the watchman’s
trumpet on the spire of the cathedral announced to the inhabitants

of Worms that Luther was entering the city. He was accompanied
by an honorary escort of about one hundred knights. A large multitude soon gathered about him. He rode to the residence of the
Knights of St. John, where he took up his abode. After he had
alighted, he “‘gazed about with the eyes of a demon,” as Aleander
says (who, however, never saw him and declined to attend the ses-

sions).? “God will be with me,” he said. Clad in a cowl, with a leather
girdle, and a scanty tonsure about his brow, he exhibited a wretched
figure, emaciated as he was by fatiguing labors and the stress of
uninterrupted excitement. But his eyes beamed with a brilliant, deeply
glowing, and defiant lustre. A faithful representation of his appearance in 1521 is supplied by Lucas Cranach’s etching which forms
the frontispiece of the German edition of his works. The lower jaw,
the nape of the neck, the mouth and the eyes conspire to give an

impression of defiant self-reliance. It is the best portrait of Luther
which we have, all the others being considerably “toned down.”

On the following day Luther was escorted by the marshal of the

5, where Spalatin’s (German) Annals (ed. by
8 Cf. Briefwechsel, 111, p. 122, annotation,

Cyprian, 1718, p. 38) are quoted and reference is made to Luther’s address to Sturm recorded in the Table Talks, No. 2609 (Weimar ed,, III, No. 3357b, p. 285).
® Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 355.

184

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

diet and the imperial herald to an assembly of certain members of
the diet who had been summoned to meet the Emperor in the bishop’s
court. The edifice no longer exists. The Wittenberg jurist Schurf
accompanied him as his counsel, and, together with the counselors
of the Elector of Saxony, assisted him in the preparation of his address. He entered the hall with a forced smile on his countenance,
and critically scanned the audience. He was unable, however, to

conceal a feeling of depression. He delivered the few brief words
that he was allowed to utter, according to a Spanish report, “with

great trepidation and little serenity in countenance or gestures.”
It was not surprising that the gravity of the moment affected even
his habitually defiant disposition. The speaker of the assembly, and
official of the Archbishop of Treves, the adroit John von Eck (not
to be confused with Dr. Eck of Ingolstadt), addressed two questions to him: first, whether he admitted the authorship of the books
that had been placed before him; secondly, whether he was prepared to recant. He acknowledged the authorship of the books, after
their titles had been read to him. As to the question of recantation,
he begged for time to reflect on account of the importance of the
matter for his spiritual welfare. He intended to delay matters, but
his expectations were disappointed when, after a brief consultation,
the Emperor granted him but one day.
After Luther had left, his appearance was being discussed, and the
Emperor said: “This fellow will not make a heretic of me.” The most
diverse opinions were relayed to Aleander in his retirement. He

wrote to Rome that some regarded Luther as deluded, others as
possessed, and others again as a man filled with a holy spirit.1?

In the evening Luther, assisted by his counsel, carefully prepared
a statement which he intended to make the following day. He was
“in good spirits” during his intercourse with others.

The decisive session was held in the same court, but in a more
spacious hall and in the presence of a larger audience. Luther appeared with an escort of friends who showed a bold front. He himself was noticeably less timid than on the previous day, and exhibited
a more deliberate reverence toward the high assembly. The official of

the archbishop of Treves addressed words of admonition to him
and inquired whether he was prepared to recant. Thereupon Luther,
10 Brieger, Aleander und Luther, pp. 143, 147; Kalkoff,
Die Depeschen Aleanders vom
Wormser Reichstag, and ed., 1897, pp. 167, 171.

LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE THE EMPIRE

185

in a firm tone, began the oration which has since became so famous.
He contended that his writings were partly of a religious character,
partly directed against the pope and his adherents, and partly replies
to individual opponents which had been forced from him. They
contained nothing that was censurable. He entered upon a detailed
explanation of his writings against the pope, designedly availing
himself of this occasion to complain bitterly against the Roman
tyranny “in my Germany,” as he put it, “to which I owe my serv-

ices.” He was relying on the temper of the princely audience who,
as he well knew, were ill-disposed toward the abuses prevalent at
the papal court. He also spoke of the judgments of God which
overtook the rulers of the Old Testament who resisted the Word

of God. He was not interrupted. After he had ended, Eck called his
attention to the fact that his doctrines had long ago been condemned
by the Church, that their condemnation had been reaffirmed by
the recent proclamation of the pope, and that it was unthinkable
that all Christendom had been groping about in darkness up to
then. The official concluded his remarks with the demand that

Luther should state clearly and unambiguously whether or not he
was ready to retract. Luther replied: “If I am not convinced by

proofs from Scripture or clear theological reasons, I remain convinced by the passages which I have quoted [in my book] from

Scripture, and my conscience is held captive by the Word of God.
I cannot and will not retract, for it is neither prudent nor right to
go against one’s conscience. So help me God, Amen!” These last words

did not resound through the hall with tragic solemnity, as Protestant

biographers are wont to put it. On the contrary, they were scarcely
“audible, according to the oldest sources, because of the great uproar
and indignation which ensued, and also because of the fact that the
audience began to crowd out of the stifling hall, which was illuminated by torch-lights. Nor did Luther’s declaration conclude with
the celebrated exclamation: “Here I stand. I cannot do otherwise.

God help me, Amen.” Long ago even Protestant scholars have
demonstrated that this sentence is unhistorical. The expression, “So
help me God, Amen,” was a formula with which it had been customary, since the Middle Ages, to conclude solemn speeches. It was
.’
simply a Christian paraphrase of ‘the Latin dixi,” 1 have spoken
ac,
Luther
l,
officia
the
After a further exchange of words with
11 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 65 sq., 75 sq.; Lutherstudien, Vol. 1, pp. 26;

42.

186

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

companied by his escort, left the episcopal court. Outside, feeling

that he had been victorious, he imitated the lansquenets, when they
celebrated a successful surprise-attack, by swinging his arms about
in the air and spreading out the fingers of his hands. “I have succeeded,” he exclaimed; “I have succeeded!” In the tavern he repeated this demonstration, as he greeted those who awaited him at
the bar. During the draughts of merriment, to which they abandoned
themselves, no one realized the gravity and responsibility of the

situation.

Those who had made preparations for a violent coup d’état at
Worms were also in the main satisfied. As a result of the ferment
among Luther’s sympathizers, a placard had been posted at the town-

hall during the night, announcing that hostilities had been declared
upon the “Romanists,” i.e., the loyal adherents of the Church, by

four hundred unnamed members of the nobility, who, it was alleged,

were prepared to launch an attack with a force of 6000 men. The

revolutionary watch-word “Bundschuh,” thrice repeated, appeared
in place of the signatures. The word referred to the so-called auxiliaries supplied by the peasant estate. It was a custom of the peasants to
wear strapped shoes. Referring subsequently to the protectors
of

Luther who were prepared to do battle in his defense, Thomas Miinzer

told Luther: “You would have been stabbed to death by the
knights, if you had hesitated or recanted.” He said this to
expose
the vain-glory with which Luther was accustomed to boast of
his

courage at Worms, in the presence of the great men
of the empire.

That there was danger of the safe-conduct being violated, is

a fable
of subsequent invention, nourished no doubt by Luther’s assertion
s.!2
The Emperor was determined that the promise should be kept
and
that the return of the obstinate monk to Wittenberg should
be
unmolested.
Prior to Luther’s departure, several days were
consumed in an
endeavor to bring him round. It was done at the instigat
ion of the
estates who feared unrest in the city and in the empire.
Their decisive
declaration, issued on the twentieth of April, was to the
effect that,
if Luther did not yield, they would sustain the Empero
r in what12 Cf. Grisar, Lutherstudien, 1, p. 88. Annotati

5432b.

on 63 of the Table Talks, Weimar ed., No.

LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE THE EMPIRE

187

ever measures he might take against the obstinate heretic.!®* The
archbishop of Treves, Richard von Greiffenklau, with the assistance
of others vainly endeavored to persuade Luther to modify his stand.
Equally fruitless were the efforts of the scholarly and highly respected
John Cochlaeus, dean of the chapter-foundation of Our Lady at
Frankfort on the Main. He narrates that Luther listened to him
with tears in his eyes (which the latter afterwards denied) and
appealed to a private revelation which he claimed to have received
(est mibi revelatum).'* An offer which Cochlaeus made to dispute
with Luther in public before authorized judges, likewise proved
futile. Luther’s friends within the diet encouraged him. The Elector
Frederick alone, true to his usually circumspect and diplomatic habit,
held back. Never did he converse personally with his Wittenberg
professor, but only through intermediaries. He is reported to have
said: “Doctor Martinus is far too bold for me.”
Before the termination of the imperial safe-conduct, Frederick
excogitated a plan to safeguard his protégé against the dangers likely
to result from the imminent declaration of the imperial ban. Luther
was initiated in the scheme while yet at Worms. A simulated attack
was to be made upon him by the soldiers of the Elector on the homeward journey, and he was to be taken into custody.
Accompanied by his escort, Luther left the city unobserved in
a carriage, on April 26. He had received an order not to preach on
his journey, but he disregarded it, contending that the Word of

God is untrammeled. Having arrived at Friedberg in the Wetterau,
he addressed two solemn letters defending himself, one to Charles
V, the other to the princes and estates at Worms.*® These letters were
immediately published in order to create sympathy in his behalf.
In the first of them, the original of which is now on exhibition in the

“Luther-Halle” at Wittenberg, he solemnly appeals to St. Paul and
declares that he can no more deviate from the Gospel of Christ than
the Apostle, who was ready to anathematize even an angel if he
preached another Gospel. It was not the will of God that His Word
should be subject to man; in matters pertaining to salvation no one
183 Cf. N. Paulus, “War das Wormser Edikt ungesetzlich?” in the Histor. Jabrbuch,
1918—19, pp. 269 sqq.

14 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 258; Vol VI, pp. 143 sq.; Reichstagsakten (see note 3

above), p. 630. Luther’s denial, Opp. Lat Var., VII, p. 48. The offer of disputation, Reichstagsakten, p. 629; cf. Table Talks, Weimar ed., No. 5432b.
16 Briefwechsel, 111, pp. 129, 135; both letters are dated April 28.

188

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

may depend upon a mere mortal. In saying this, he was oblivious of
his own claim that he alone was able to interpret the Gospel properly
and thus show men the way to salvation. He pretended to forget the

fact that, when the Church requires men to rely on her doctrine and
her interpretation of Holy Writ, this is no demand of fallible men,

but of a supernatural institution established by God, invested with
divine authority and protected against error—an institution in which
the living Christ continues His operations until the end of time.
He who understands the true character of this divine institution will take no stock in the assertion, current among Protestants, that
Luther represented liberty of conscience when he took his “heroic”
stand at Worms. For freedom of conscience is not violated by the
demand to submit to a divinely appointed teaching authority; on
the contrary, conscience is thereby directed to the certain possession
of higher truth, to contentment and true happiness. The statement

that Luther at Worms struggled for complete liberty of research
and autonomy of reason as the domain of future civilization, must

he read in the light of his own express declaration in his concluding
address that he was bound by the Word of Scripture, hence by the
compelling power of revelation—understood, of course, in the sense
in which he interpreted it. In brief, the diet of Worms does not
mark the birth of intellectual liberty, neither for conservative Protestantism, nor for that Neo-Protestantism which is rapidly developing into infidelity, nor yet for the modern world.1®
The tragic schism, caused by subjectivism in breaking away from
the ancient and venerable universal Church, is all that remains of
the incident at Worms. But if one were to abstract entirely from
the religious aspect of the rupture, the consequences of the so-called
declaration of liberty would show that no genuine benefit accrued
to Germany, which has been growing weaker and more disunited
ever since.

Shortly after Luther’s appearance before the diet of Worms, this

event was so much ‘exaggerated by his friends, that a great many

legends entwined themselves about it. As he set out for home, it

was impossible for Luther to foresee the halo with which these days

would be surrounded in later years. Among the legends referred to is
the alleged text of a prayer which he was said to have recited at
16 For more details see Grisar, Lutberstudien, 1, ch. vi "Luther zu Worms, ein Kimpfer

flr Geistesfreibeit?” (pp. 28 sqq.)

LUTHER ON TRIAL BEFORE THE EMPIRE

189

Worms. A staff which he had stuck into the ground, in testimony of
the truth of his doctrine, was said to have grown into a marvelous
‘tree. George von Frundsberg, the leader of the lansquenets, was

said to have declared in the presence of Luther, prior to his appearance before the princes and estates, that God would not abandon
the little monk if he were in the right. The nuncio Aleander is
quoted as saying:

“If the Germans repudiate the rule of Rome,

we shall take care that they perish in their own blood amid internecine
struggles.” Aleander was falsely reputed to have been a baptized
Jew, or, as Luther said, an infidel who had lost faith in Christianity.

The only true element in the charges made against him is that his
past history was not blameless, because he had been infected by
the Italian Renaissance, and that he often expressed himself imprudently in his letters and addresses. Of course, in the eyes of the
Lutherans, the representatives of the “papistical” party at Worms
were all venal scoundrels devoid of character, who condemned
Luther contrary to their own convictions and acted only for the
sake of papal favor and reward. The Archbishop of Treves is

said to have made an attempt to poison Luther at a banquet, and
Cochlaeus’ offer of disputing with Luther was a ruse for endangering his personal safety. Luther himself contributed his share to these
legends. He later on boasted of the ineffable courage with which,
alone and forsaken at the diet, he jumped into the very jaws of
“Behemoth.” He alleged that the Emperor had outlawed him even
before his (Luther’s) arrival, by revoking his safe-conduct in virtue
of the edict condemning his books. He also claimed that the Emperor
proceeded against him after his departure by means of a surrepti-

tious and invalid proscription without the sanction of the diet.?

Apprehensive of the future, Luther left Worms in a carriage, on

May 4, accompanied by Amsdorf and a fellow-monk from Mohra;
he journeyed in the direction of Gotha, when five mounted horsemen, according to a preconcerted plan, stopped the carriage near
Waltershausen, dragged Luther out, placed him on a horse, and, by
detours selected for the sake of secrecy, brought him to Wartburg
castle, near Eisenach, where they arrived about eleven o’clock at

night. Amsdorf, who had been initiated into the affair, was per-

mitted to continue his journey, after he had roundly abused his
17 On these and other false legends cf. ibid. VI: “Lutherfabeln vom Augsburger

Relchstag” (pp. 36 894.)

190

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

assailants for the sake of pretense. The monk from Mohra escaped.
The Wartburg was the property of the Elector of Saxony; not
wishing to know where Luther was, in order to escape embarrassment,
he had permitted his counselors to select the place. For a considerable
space of time, Luther disappeared from the scene. His patron could
not have resorted to a better expedient to save him.

2. THE SENTENCE OF OUTLAWRY
The imperial councilors, even before the opening of the diet, had
taken the point of view that the Emperor, by virtue of his own

authority, was empowered to pronounce sentence of outlawry
against Luther. The two nuncios demanded that he issue the
edict as a sacred duty, since by the terms of his royal oath he was
the sworn protector of the Church. The high-chancellor, Gattinara,
in opposition to the Saxon Elector, announced that the edict of

outlawry should be issued “with the knowledge, but not with the
counsel and consent of the princes.” 18 On February 19, before
Luther arrived in Worms, the diet had left it to the Emperor to proclaim “the proper mandate,” i. e., the sentence of outlawry in the event
of Luther’s refusal to recant. On April 20, as we saw above, the diet
expressly renewed its consent to this step. When the Emperor, without necessity, but in a spirit of accommodation, inquired as to the

best method of procedure, the estates desired that the mandate be
submitted to them, so that “at the request of His Majesty they
might indicate their opinion in this matter.” But, in matter of fact,
the edict was not submitted to the diet, whose members had already

begun to scatter. Nor was it necessary to do so. The editor of the
recently published Reichstagsakten writes: “There can be no doubt
that the Emperor was now justified in issuing an edict in his own
right, without further consultation of the estates.” Moreover, the

legitimacy of the imperial edict of outlawry was freely admitted by
the estates assembled in 1524 for the diet of Nuremberg, which
declared that the edict was issued “with mature deliberation and
after the Electors, princes, and other estates had been consulted.”
1?
Hence, the more recent objection to the legality of the edict of
Worms as an imperial measure are unfounded.

18 Kalkoff, Luther und die Entscheidungsjabre, pp. 187 sq.
19 Cf. Paulus, /. c. (note 13 above), for the documentary
evidence for all these asser-

tions,

THE SENTENCE OF OUTLAWRY

191

The edict was drawn up under date of May 8, after Luther, whose
whereabout was kept secret from everybody, had already spent a
number of days at the Wartburg, and after his safe-conduct had
expired.
This document was chiefly the work of Aleander, who unfolded
therein the whole penal system of the Middle Ages. Since the days
when Christianity issued from the catacombs, many changes had taken
place in the public relationship between Church and State and
modifications had become necesssary even in the interest of practicability, if for no other reasons. But the eyes of Aleander, the Italian,
only saw the dangers threatened by the negligence of the bishops
and the immense growth of the Lutheran movement. For this reason
the nuncios, together with other religious-minded people, prevailed

upon the young Emperor, who was zealous in his defense of the
Church, to invoke the entire legal machinery of the Middle Ages

against heresy and the imminent revolt. Nor were the traditional
forceful phrases spared which denounced heresy as the greatest of all

evils.2?

In the introductory part of the edict Charles declared that his imperial
office obliged him to protect the Church and that he was in duty bound to
heed the Providence which had entrusted him with many countries and with

greater authority to promote the welfare of Christianity than was wielded
by any of his predecessors. The protection of religion was traditional with
his family, through which, on his father’s side, he was related to the most
Christian emperors and archdukes of Austria and the dukes of Burgundy,
and also, on his mother’s side, which originated in Spain and Sicily. Hence

it was his duty to resist the new heresies, which had originated in hell, after
the pope had solemnly condemned them and excommunicated the man who
propagated them. In vain had Luther been urged to abandon them at
Worms.

The edict goes on to enumerate the errors of the heretic and recalls his
very words that, if Hus, who had been burned at the stake, was a heretic, he
himself (Luther) was a ten times greater heretic than Hus. In addition, it
says, Luther destroys obedience to authority and publishes writings which
serve but to foment revolt, schism, and bloody dissensions. He proclaims

a brand of Christian liberty destructive of all law, the liberty of irrational
beasts. The document styles him a devil in human form and says, if Germany
and other countries are not to perish, it is the Emperor’s duty to enforce,
20 Text of the Edict in the Reichstagsakten, ed. by Wrede, II, pp. 640 sqq.

192

THE DIET OF WORMS (1521)

without delay or mitigation, “the laudable constitutions of the Christian
Roman emperors, which they promulgated for the punishment and extermi-

nation of heretics.” Therefore, Luther is declared outlawed for the whole
extent of the empire, “with the unanimous consent and will,” as the docu-

ment has it, of the Electors, princes, and estates of the diet of Worms.
Consequently, no one was allowed henceforth to provide him with shelter,

food, drink, etc.; on the contrary, he is to be apprehended wherever he may
be found and surrendered to the imperial authorities. Those who disobey the

edict incur the penalties of high treason and will themselves be treated as
outlaws, liable to the forfeiture of all royal prerogatives, feudal tenures,
favors, and liberties which they received from the emperor and the empire.
The protectors and adherents of the heretic are to be apprehended, and their
property is to be given to those who proceed against them, to be used for

their own benefit.

All the literary productions of Luther, even if they incidentally contain

some good things, are to be burnt and shunned like poison. The plague of

anti-religious books, pamphlets, pictures, etc., composed by others, as well

as all libels against the pope, prelates, princes, universities, etc., are to be

exterminated. Books which in any manner touch on matters of faith may be
printed only after they have been submitted to the censorship of a bishop or

of the nearest theological faculty. All other literary productions require the
episcopal approbation.

The strict ordinance concerning publications was intended to
check an evil which had assumed boundless proportions. The edict

was in strict accord with the severe prescriptions of Leo X and the

Fifth Lateran Council (1515) regarding preventive censorship.2?
The new invention of the “right noble art of printing,” as it is
styled in the Emperor’s edict, had degenerated in virtue of a deluge

of writings and pamphlets which disseminated errors, fostered agitation, and preached ecclesiastical and social revolution. Regardless of
consequences, wood-cuts were used to heap mockery upon the hier-

archy as well as the rulers who did not sufficiently comply with the

desires of the nobility or the oppressed peasantry. Luther, by his
polemical tracts against the Church, had, from the beginning of his
career, set the example of evading the existing censorship laws.

During the diet of Worms quite 2 number of publications appeared
in favor of the new doctrines. Aleander complained that his character was subject to defamation by publications and pictures in the
city of the high assembly. At the time when Luther himself
was
21 Pastor, History of the Popes, tr. by R. Kerr, Vol. VIII, 2nd ed.,
1923, pp. 397 sq.

THE SENTENCE OF OUTLAWRY

193

condemned, and even prior to his condemnation, there were circulated
at Worms and in other places in the empire, pictorial representations of him with the dove, the symbol of the Holy Ghost, hovering above his head. Other pictures represented him with a halo. A
booklet on the Passion of Martinus, patterned after the Gospel narrative of the Passion of Christ, was published, in which he was
glorified as a persecuted hero.

When the report of the edict of outlawry reached Luther at the
Castle of Wartburg, he wrote to Amsdorf:?2 “A cruel edict has
gone forth against me, but God will laugh at them” (Ps. xxxvi, 13).
Spalatin he informed 23 that he was aggrieved at this procedure, not
for his own sake, but because his opponents thereby heaped disaster

upon their heads and the time of their punishment was evidently
at hand. He adds in reference to his opponent, Duke George of
Saxony, a man distinguished by the traits of a noble character:
“Would that this swine of Dresden were found worthy to kill me
during a public sermon! If it pleased God, I should suffer for the
sake of His Word. The will of the Lord be done.”

In these first letters he also rejoices in the unchained power of
the masses (moles vulgi imminentis), who were, he said, preparing
terror for the authors of the edict and all his persecutors; it is evident,

he adds, that the people are unwilling and unable to tolerate any

Jonger the yoke of the pope and the papists.

Rendered confident by these phenomena, he continues to indulge
his scornful denunciation of the edict: “Swine and asses are able to
see how stubbornly they act. . . . What if my death should prove
a disaster to you all? God is not to be trifled with.” Thus he exclaims
a few years later, when, to show his contempt, he incorporates the
entire lengthy document in his work Zwei kaiserliche uneinige Gebote
(Two Discordant Imperial Commandments; 1524), and accompanies
them with biting comments.?* In a frenzy of higher inspiration he

advises that ‘“‘everyone who believes in the existence of God keep
away from the commandments (of the imperial proclamation).” “If
they kill me, there will be such a slaughter as neither they nor their
children will be able to overcome.”
22 Briefwechsel, 111, p. 151; May 12.
23 Ibid., p. 153; same day.
24 Werke, Weimar ed., XV, pp. 254 sqq.

