CHAPTER IV

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE
I.

INTERPRETATION

OF THE EPISTLE TO

THE ROMANS

(r515-1516)
In none of his other Epistles does St. Paul penetrate so deeply into
the questions of grace, justification, and election, as in his magnificent Epistle addressed to the Christians of Rome. Luther believed

that this profound Epistle furnished the thread that would lead him
out of his labyrinth. Disregarding the tradition of the Church concerning the meaning of the Epistle, he buried himself in its contents

and brooded over its many mysterious expressions. For him the
sacred document was to become the subject-matter of academic

lectures with entirely new ideas. How often may he not have
wandered up and down the venerable corridors of the monastery
meditating on the significance of the words of the Apostle. His
emaciated form may have become animated, his deep-set eyes may
have flashed, as he imagined to discover in the Epistle to the Romans
the desired solution of his problems. With ever-increasing confidence

he imputed to the Apostle the ideas to which he was urged for the
sake of the supposed quieting of his scruples. Simultaneously, an
arsenal of new weapons against the self-righteous Pharisees within
the Church seemed to open itself to him.

St. Paul sets forth the idea that neither the observation of the law
of nature nor that of the Mosaic law can justify man before God,
but only the grace of God now revealed through the Gospel of

Christ. In this exposition Luther erroneously discovered a denial
of the natural powers of man and the sole causality of God in His
creature—a doctrine utterly foreign to the Apostle’s mind. In the
propositions on the grace of Christ, as set forth by Paul, he discovered an ascription of the merits of Christ equally foreign to the
mind of the Apostle—a purely external imputation without works
on the part of man. St. Paul discourses sublimely on the freedom of
7F

2

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

the Christian believer from the disciplinary law of Moses and on the
freedom of the soul that is directed towards God. From this Luther
inferred that the true Christian was free from all law and formulated

for himself a contrast between the law and the Gospel which implied
fatal consequences. The Apostle, again, paints a striking picture
of
the rejection of the Jewish nation from anterior secret decrees, which
prove his notion of predestination to hell. In a similar way his lively
imagination interpreted other doctrines of the Epistle, which he
confidently undertook to explain, despite the fact that his deficient

- training rendered him incompetent for the task.

He began to lecture on Romans in the second semester of 1515.
We have his own manuscript of the lectures and a faithful copy
of it, which is preserved in the Vatican Library. Fr. Henry Denifle,

O. P., has the honor of having first edited extensive extracts from
the Roman copy in 1904. Four years later John Ficker published the
original, the existence of which was till then unknown. It belongs
to the Berlin Library.

These publications were of inestimable advantage for the student
of Luther. As contrasted with the numerous defective reproductions
of these lectures previously circulated, we have here for the first time
an authentic insight into the genesis and original form of Luther’s
teaching. Since that day, investigators have been occupied with the
task of analyzing and discussing these lectures. The principal outlines are clear, but there are differences of opinion with respect to
various details. This is all the more natural, since Luther, when he
delivered these lectures, was still undergoing a spiritual process of

development. He sometimes contradicts his own views and retains

various elements of Catholic thought which cannot be reconciled
with his changed views. The opening sentences disclose the impulsive

vigor with which he advances towards his new position. He commences by stating that St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, was
desirous of eradicating “all wisdom and righteousness” of the terres-

trial man; that he wished to destroy, “in heart and marrow,” all
man’s works, even the best-intentioned and noblest, and all his

virtues. Instead, he wished “to cultivate and glorify sin,” that is,
to describe the permanent hereditary sin of mankind, in order
to set
up an alien righteousness, . ., the grace of Christ imputed
to us by

faith. In this manner, he says, St. Paul inculcates the doctrine of self-

PRINCIPAL PROPOSITIONS OF LUTHER

73

annihilation on the one hand, and, on the other, resignation to the
sole causality and omnipotence of God.
2. THE PRINCIPAL PROPOSITIONS OF LUTHER’S DOCTRINE

The ancient Church, above all things, upheld the freedom of the
human will to do good. She steadfastly maintained that God wills
the salvation of all men without exception and to this end offers
them the necessary grace, with which men should freely cobperate.
Baptism makes a man a child of God by virtue of sanctifying grace;

but the inclination to evil remains through no fault of his own, provided he does not consent to sin. Concupiscence is diminished by the
means of grace offered by the Church. If any one has been seduced
into committing mortal sin, he may confidently hope to regain the

state of grace through the merits of the death of Christ, provided he
submits to penance and resolves to amend his life. Merefaith in the

application of the merits of Christ is not sufficient. /Actual grace
assists man to be converted and to persevere in doing good. |

In these few propositions we have described a splendid system
of doctrine, which accords with the free, rational nature of man
as well as with the infinite goodness of God. This is not the place to
demonstrate its truth from the sources of divine revelation, Scripture
and tradition.
Luther, with the Epistle to the Romans in his hand, proclaimed

that man was not free to do good; that all his efforts were sinful,
because evil concupiscence dwelled in his soul; that God did everything in him, governing him as the rider governs his steed. He did
not differentiate between natural and supernatural good. Christ,
he said, has fulfilled the law for me and atoned for every weakness

and sin. Through His righteousness the believing and trustful sinner
is covered, apart from his own works and his own righteousness. He
remains a sinner as before, but is justified by the imputation of the
justice of Christ and necessarily brings forth good works through
the infinite causality of God, just as trust in God is imparted to the
hesitating only through the divine omnipotence.

According to Luther’s teaching, not all men are thus favored by
God, since His inscrutable decree consigns many to eternal damnation. Resignation to hell is the highest virtue because it connotes

74

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

complete submission to the will of God. But this very resignation
reconciles the despondent soul with the thought of a merciful God.
Perfect humility and submission (perfecta humilitas) must serve us

as 2 kind of anchor. The doctrine of the absolute certainty of sal-

vation, or rather, the certitude of justification through mere belief
in Christ, had not yet been discovered by Luther. Instead, he still

upheld the Catholic teaching on merit, similarly as when, in con-

nection with justification, he employed Catholic expressions, albeit
obscurely and hesitatingly, to set forth his conception of the renova-

tion of the inward man. The renovation, however, which Luther
indicates, is far removed from that which the ancient Church teaches
on the basis of Sacred Scripture, namely, that the spirit of God,
poured forth into the soul, abides in man. Luther ridicules the outpouring of grace in man in virtue of the so-called habits and the implanted supernatural virtues. He had nothing but scorn for the
“sophists” who entertained such “silly notions.”
His exposition of the new theology, which we have condensed
above, is accompanied by a haughty and repellent treatment of the
traditional dogmas and theology. He selects some actual deficiencies

of the older theologians, in order to stigmatize the entire past, especially the Scholastic system, with which he was but inadequately
acquainted.!

3. EFFECTS OF LUTHER’S FIRST APPEARANCE

Protests were immediately voiced. In September,

1516, Luther

arranged for a disputation at the University of Wittenberg, to be
conducted by Bartholomew Bernhardi, a native of Feldkirch in
Vorarlberg, for which he himself supplied the theses. They were
chiefly concerned with the utter moral incompetence of man in the
state of nature. The solemn disputation, according to his own testimony, was intended to silence the “yelping curs” which might rise
up against him. The theses stated that man sins even when doing the

best he can; for he is absolutely unable by his own unaided efforts
to keep the commandments of God.2

1On the doctrinal content of Luther's Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, see
Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, pp. 184 sqq., 374 5qq.
2 Op. cit.,, Vol. 1, pp. 310 sq.

EFFECTS OF LUTHER’S FIRST APPEARANCE

75

In October, 2516, he began his celebrated shorter lectures on the
Epistle to the Galatians. In the printed edition with which we are

familiar, as well as in the condensed form in which they have been
recently published, they constitute a still more vigorous expression of
his views. These lectures were followed, in 1517, by his prelections on
the Epistle to the Hebrews, which have not yet been printed. The
Wittenberg disputation and the lectures delivered by Luther at that
time were subsequently represented by him and his friends as “the
commencement of the gospel business.” 3
Whilst the reports concerning Luther caused the monks at Erfurt
and other cloisters to be startled, and whilst the opposition to him
at Wittenberg increased, influential professors at the University

gradually espoused his cause. Among these were the following:
Andrew Karlstadt, who up to this time had labored energetically in
the interests of Scholasticism; Nicholas Amsdorf, who was destined

to distinguish himself as an ardent enthusiast, more Lutheran even
than Luther himself; and Peter Lupinus, a former professor and
originally an antagonist of the new thought. Of special importance
for Luther was the support and codperation of the Augustinian,
Wenceslaus Link, prior of the Wittenberg monastery and since 1511

a doctor at the University, a confidant of Luther and one of the
supporters of Staupitz. After having accompanied the latter on several
visitation tours, he arrived in 1517 at Nuremberg, where he pleaded

_the cause of Lutheranism in eloquent sermons. At Nuremberg, the
humanist Christopher Scheurl became a friend of the Lutherans.
At Erfurt Luther had an active supporter in his old friend, John
Lang, the prior of that place. To him Luther wrote, in 1517, that he

contemned the reproaches of the Augustinians of Erfurt for his alleged presumption, since God’s work would be realized in him. “Pray
fervently for me,” he wrote, “as I pray for you, that our Lord Jesus
may assist us and help us bear our temptations, which are known

to no one but ourselves.” *

The law faculty of Wittenberg entertained diverse opinions of
Luther. Among the first to defend him was the jurist Jerome Schurf,
who subsequently became the patriarch of jurisprudence at Wittenberg. The renowned Martin Pollich, who, with Staupitz, was one of
the founders of the University, freely acknowledged Luther’s extra8 Op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 303 sqq.

4 Enders, Lutbers Briefwechsel, 1, p. 124 (November 11.)

76

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

ordinary talents.® Most of the other professors, however, were either
against him or noncomittal, because they disapproved of his opposition to canon law. Already at that time Luther was not fond
of the representatives of jurisprudence, to whose legal demands, on
the basis of his peculiar mysticism, he opposed an exaggerated *“‘passive” complaisance.

‘
The reformer’s most agitated opponents at Wittenberg quite naturally were those monks and clergymen whom Luther in his lectures
and in the pulpit was wont to castigate as self-righteous. We know
from what has been said above that the high esteem in which the
Observance was held by many Augustinians was severely criticized
by Luther. Among the younger student monks were some who brought
with them from the cloister sound traditions and a spirit of enthusiasm
for the external exercises of piety which Luther and his supporters
disliked. They became the kernel of an active party who attacked the
new theology. Luther assailed the self-righteous and Pharisaical Observantines all the more hotly. At the time of his lectures on the

Epistle to the Romans (1515) he delivered a Christmas sermon, in
which he raised his voice against them.

As the ancient prophets, philosophers, and scribes who proclaimed the
truth were persecuted, so, Luther assures us, he in turn is being persecuted.

Men exclaimed that he erred when he called Christ a hen, who, as it were,

gathers us under His wings, in virtue of His merits and righteousness, in
order to make us righteous. The opponents of the hen should know that

their righteousness is sin. Since man is unable to fulfill the law, it behooves

him to exclaim: “O sweet hen!” However, one may not scek virtues and
gifts according to one’s own opinion. Thus, with a lavish hand, Luther
casts about him the products of his mysticism in the course of a ser-

mon.®

Meanwhile, his adversaries, who were solicitous about the Church and
their Order, did not remain inactive. Luther charged them in a sermon in
mid-summer, 1516, with shooting arrows at those who are pure of heart.

They, in common with countless other contemporaries, he exclaims, are
becoming obdurate in their “carnal righteousness and wisdom.” They are
the greatest evil in the Church; their shibboleth, that one is obliged to
5 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1V, pp. 248 sq.
8 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 970 (German ed.)

EFFECTS OF LUTHER’S FIRST APPEARANCE

77

do what is good, is a pestilence whereby they antagonize the goodness of
God. He enumerates no less than seven transgressions of which they were
~ guilty.”
Luther’s enemies were cowed by his vehement attacks. They could not
compete with him as an orator. In Wittenberg especially there was no one
to challenge him. It was a tragical advantage in his favor that his talents
enabled him to stand head and shoulders above all the brethren of his Order.
Opposition merely increased his audacity.

On September 4, 1517, he arranged another sensational disputation by his disciple Franz Giinther of Nordhausen on ninety-seven
theses composed by him against Scholasticism and Aristotle. One
of these theses was that man can “desire and do only evil.” Another,
that “his will is not free.” Another, that “the sole disposition for
grace is predestination, eternal election by God.” Another that
“neither the Jewish ceremonial code, nor the decalogue, nor what-

ever may be externally taught or commanded, is a good law; the
only good law is the love of God,” etc. At the end of these par-

adoxical theses we find the assurance that nothing in their contents
contradicted Catholic dogma and the ecclesiastical writers. These
ninety-seven propositions of 1517 enjoyed a certain circulation prior
to the publication, in the same year, of Luther’s famous theses on
indulgences, which are not nearly so far-reaching. In consequence
of this disputation several distinguished men, like Scheurl of Nurem-

berg, expressed the belief that a “restoration of the theology of
Christ” was under way. Some time previously Luther triumphantly
wrote to Lang: “Our theology and St. Augustine are making good
progress and thanks be to God they prevail at our university. . . .
The lectures on the Sentences [delivered by the Scholastic teachers] are

completely ignored, and no one can assure himself of an audience

who does not profess this [i. e., our] theology.” ®

The assertion that Augustine was coming into his own in virtue

of the new doctrine was as little in accord with the truth as the
statement that that doctrine was genuinely Pauline. On the contrary,
Luther’s errors may be refuted point for point from the writings
70p. cit., Vol. III, p. 971 (original German edition; omitted in the English translation
which we always quote in this volume,* except where the German edition is expressly
mentioned.)

8 Op. cit., Vol. IV, pp. (May 18, 1517.)

78

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

of Augustine, who, in his contest with the Pelagians, forcefully points
out the rdle of grace, yet neither denies that man has a part in
every good deed, nor, much less, that he has a free will. The great
Doctor of the Church acknowledges the devastating results of origi-

nal sin, but he demands the fulfillment of the entire law with divine
aid. In the theology of St. Augustine the grace of divine sonship
is not merely an imputation of alien righteousness, but a supernatural state of the soul which has been truly cleansed of sin. He
- admits that the distribution of grace is an inscrutable mystery, but
rejects the theory of absolute predestination to hell as an abomina-

tion. He frequently argues in favor of the freedom of the human
spirit and the dominion of love. But he does not hold man to be

independent of the laws of God or the Church; or that love must
be the sole motive of action to the exclusion of fear of God’s punishments so natural to man. Above all, Augustine is a defender of
ecclesiastical authority and tradition, who inexorably combated

arbitrariness, the spirit of innovation and subjectivism in doctri-

nal matters. In spite of Luther’s boastfulness, he and Augustine are
poles apart. All that may be said in extenuation of Luther is that

Augustine’s thought is frequently profound, and that, as a rule,
he does not propound his doctrines methodically, but either in the
service of controversy or adapted to the changing requirements of

souls and the Kingdom of Heaven. As a consequence, his teach-

ing in some respects is more easily misunderstood than that of other

ecclesiastical writers. Luther repeatedly read his own ideas into Au-

gustine with a rashness that was but little removed from conscious

falsification.
For the rest, to understand Luther, we must bear in mind
that
the theological tradition since the days of Scholasticism was not
yet
fully clarified. Some of the theological doctrines which he
criticized had not been treated adequately in the schools. The subseque
nt
labors of the theologians at the Council of Trent indicate how
much
still remained to be done in the matter of clearing up
such questions as original sin, grace, and justification.

It is highly amazing, however, to see Luther proposing new
theories
without interrogating more closely the well-established
doctrinal
tradition of the Church and questioning the latter’s
prerogative to
teach, which had been instituted by Christ for the defense
of dogma.
We marvel at the fact that this sacred author
ity is almost com-

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

79

pletely set aside by him, as though it were non-existent. Luther acts
as if his fight were merely a fight against the schools, against Scho- lastic sophists, against the Aristotelians, against the new writers and
their friends, such as the followers of Gabriel Biel, whom he calls
“Gabrielists,” or against the defenders of such older authors as the
“sententiarii.”” The mighty authority of the Church, which every
Catholic theologian must consult at every step, did not impress
him sufficiently during his formative period. This deficiency is attributable, in part, to the schools where he studied and disputed,

for the later Scholastics, while indulging in hair-splitting investigation, neglected the important doctrine on the Church, or at least did

not pay enough attention to it. Too much preference was given to
speculation in contrast with authority and the question of its binding power, and, in general, with the positive study of the treasures

of tradition entrusted to the Church and her supreme government.

True Luther was not entirely unfamiliar with the doctrinal authority of the Church. On the contrary, it is very remarkable that
in his exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, despite his deviations from the faith, he strongly and in vehement language con-

demns the activities of heretics who separated themselves from the
Church. Evidently he did not at that time entertain any idea of

revolt against the hierarchy, though his complete defection from
the common doctrine of the past, if insisted upon, was bound to lead
to a separation from the hierarchy as his next step.
In his resolution to continue his criticism of good works—a

criticism dictated by false mysticism—it is notable that he still retains the idea of the monastic state for a number of years. He devotes some beautiful passages to the excellence of the monastic vows
in his lectures on the Epistle to the Romans. Hence, he arrived at his

new doctrine not as a result of his eagerness to break the sacred bonds,
but by following entirely different and most intricate routes, especially that of a morbid mysticism.

:

4. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF LUTHER’S DOCTRINE

The publication of Luther’s commentaries on the Epistle to the
Romans (1515—-1516) and the study of contemporary sources, has
clearly demonstrated, among other things, the falsity of the as-

80

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

sumption that Luther’s innovation originated in the intention of effecting a thorough and universal reform of the Church.

Ideas of powerful external and internal “reforms” have been ascribed to the “reformer” as the starting-point of his public appearance; in reality, however, such ideas did not influence him at all.
What he primarily intended was to get his peculiar doctrines accepted and introduced in his monastery and Order, in the University
of Wittenberg, and, finally, in the whole realm of contemporary
scholarship.
It is true, as the sources mentioned above indicate, he combined

with his efforts to impose his doctrines a loud demand for a reformation of ecclesiastical conditions. He ascribed the chief cause

of the prevailing abuses in the religious sphere directly to the neglect
of the truths newly discovered by him. Blinded by his imagination
and by his reckless habit of fault-finding, he exaggerated beyond
all measure, both in his exposition of the Espistle to the Romans and
in his other addresses, the shortcomings of his age in faith and morals.

In matter of fact the young monk of thirty-two years, living within

the narrow confines of a monastery, knew but little of the actual

conditions existing out in the world! Thus far his contacts with
the world had been but few. Nevertheless, he believed he saw a
veritable “deluge” of errors and abuses everywhere, because man-

kind was completely estranged from the “Word,” namely, the re-

quirements of the Bible and “righteousness,” as he understood them.

“The pope and the ecclesiastical superiors”—thus he expresses him-

self with blind audacity in these lectures—‘*have rendered themselves execrable in their endeavors ?; they are now unmasked as
seducers of the Christian populace.” These superiors, he hotly avers,
fill the whole world with their sodomitical and other vices; the faithful have completely forgotten the significance of good works, faith
and humility. Even the better class are idolaters rather than
true
Christians, because they are self-righteous.’® After such a wholesale condemnation of Christians, he is able, in turn, to
describe
minutely, in grotesque outlines and with humorous incisiven
ess, the
errors of the narrower world by which he was surroun
ded, e. g.,
the monks in choir impatiently hastening to the end of the
services.
He criticizes those of high degree with a mystical zeal, because
they
9 “Corrupti sunt et abominabiles facti sunt in studiis suis.” (Ps.
XIII, 1).
10 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1, p. 227.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

81

insisted upon their rights in preference to suffering injustice, as

true Christians should do. It was his opinion that Pope Julius II
~ should have relinquished the rights of the Church in his conflict
with the republic of Venice. Duke George of Saxony, who was engaged in warfare with the rebels in Frisia, would have done better
had he and his people patiently suffered chastisement for their sins

at the hands of their enemies for God’s sake.!? “I fear,” he says,
“that we shall all perish on account of our worldliness.” These are

utterances of a disturbed mind.

The memory of the abominations which he had witnessed, or
which he claims to have heard of in Rome, ever rises up before
him and fills him with terror. “Should we not regard as sinful the
shocking corruption of the entire curia and the mountain of revolting immorality, pomp, covetousness, vanity, and sacrilege prev-

alent there?” Germany at that time was in an ugly mood, not only
because of the avarice of the Roman collectors, but also on account

of the reports of lax morality incident to the Renaissance, since and’
even before the days of the unworthy Borgia Pope, Alexander VI
Staupitz, too, was embittered against Rome and freely vented his feel-z
ings in the presence of Luther, who stated subsequently that Staupit
had incited him against Rome.'?

Did this disaffection, which cropped out in spots already before

Luther, lead to any opposition in dogma or practice, similar toa his?
soil

Did Lutheranism have any precursors? Did it arise from
prepared by others?

t against
Many prominent men had raised their voices in protesities,
but

al author
the corruption and mistakes of the ecclesiasticloyal
to the teachdespite their criticisms, they generally remained
m
refor on the basis
ings of the Church, and simply demanded athat
ful preacher
of the ancient dogmas. Such, for example, wase Luthepower
to go as
dared
Geiler von Kaysersberg. Only a few befor Wesselr Gansfort
( +
far as did John of Wesel (+ 1481) and
ce,
Mayen
at
dral
1489). The former, who was pastor of the cathe
ce
balan
the
to spend
was cited before the Inquisition and sentencedafter
ted
recan
he had
of his days in an Augustinian monastery,
s, attacked inthing
other
g
amon
h,
whic
his erroneous propositions,
ch

dulgences and approached the Hussite heresy concerning the Chur
11 Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 228.

12 Tischreden, Weimar cd., IV, Nr. 4707.

82

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

and predestination. While still an orthodox theologian, Wesel had
taught at the University of Erfurt, but he did not influence Luther’s
development. Wessel Gansfort, who is often confused with John

of Wesel, was celebrated as a great scholar by his admirers, but
obscured the doctrine of the Church by many heretical propositions. Thus he affirmed the fallibility of ecumenical councils. The
righteous, he taught, have the power of the keys in a certain sense.
He asserted that satisfaction for sins committed was superfluous

after their remission and there was no need for indulgences, etc.
Still he conforms as little with Luther in the principal points of
the latter’s teaching, as did John of Wesel. He holds that man
has a free will, that only faith animated by charity can effect justification, and that justification is not merely a declaration of right-

eousness, but an actual process of making man just. Neither the one

nor the other of these scholars agrees with Luther in his reformatory

demands; and hence they are incorrectly hailed as precursors of the
Lutheran movement.

It has been asserted that long before Luther there existed a socalled Augustinian school of theology which propagated Luthera
n
ideas on liberty, grace and justification down to the days of
the
Protestant Reformation. In reality, however, no such school

existed,

either during or at the close of the Middle Ages. Isolated
writers,
especially during the early period of Scholasticism, did advance
risqué
propositions that smacked of Lutheranism, but
they were not in

any true sense precursors of Luther, particu
larly since they did not

create a tradition. At the same time it is difficult
, yea impossible,

to ascertain

to what extent Luther knew and used these
earljer

writers or appreciated their teaching. There

is no reason to challenge

* his independent discovery of his heresies, hence we may
readily concede
their originality.13
130n so-called precursors of Luther in the
*“School of Augustine” see Grisar, Luther

(German original, Vol. III, pp.

1011 sqq.;

this appendix is omitted in the English
trans-

lation). Grabmann in the Katholik, 1913, Nr.
3, pp. 157sqq. The connection of Fidatus
of Cascia (died 1348) with Luther s rejected
by N. Paulus in the Innsbruck Zeitschrift
fiir kath. Theologie, 1922, pp. 169 sqq.; cf.
the same writer in the Theol. Revue, 1922,

PP- 18 sq. and Histor. Jabrb., 1922,
p. 323. Some Protestant authors also
reject the theory,
e. &, R. Seeberg in Die Lebre Luthers
(1917), p. 118, and, relative to Fidatus,
in Theol.

Literaturblatt, 1923, pp.

pp.

258

sq.

Cf.

W.

197 sqq.; also Scheel in the Zeitschrift
fiir Kirchengesch.

Kohler in

the

Histor.

Braun in the Evangel. Kirchenzeitung,

Zeitschrift,

1913, PpP.

Vol.

181 sqq.

CXI,

Nr.

1, pP-

153,

1922,

and

W,

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

83

The great Luther monument at Worms, which was unveiled in
1868, embraces quite a number of statues of so-called heralds of
- the Reformation. The central figure of Luther is encircled by
statues of Savonarola, Hus, Wiclif, Reuchlin, and Peter Waldus.
Do they belong in this constellation? As precursors of Luther’s principal doctrines, certainly not; at most they may pass as opponents
of the papacy in virtue of other doctrines or because of some particular controversies.
The most advanced of these opponents of the papacy was Hus,

whose unfortunate end at the Council of Constance was the result
of heretical doctrines subversive of both Church and State. Though
Luther agreed with him in some things, and afterwards glorified him
exceedingly, he was not a disciple of Hus. When, in his early mo-

nastic years, he chanced upon a volume of Hus, he refused to read
it, though he noticed some good therein, because of his aversion
for the author’s name.}* Soon after his change of front, however,
he exploited in the interest of his own cause the unhistorical legend

that Hus, when he faced the stake, said: Now they are roasting a

goose [Hus in Bohemian signifies goose], but a swan will come which
they will not master. Luther, with a power of illusion which con-

siderably exceeded that of the dreaming and meditative figure of
Hus on the Worms monument, applied this alleged prophecy to
himself,

Nor was there any greater affinity between Luther’s teaching
and that of Hus’s precursor, John Wiclif, or that of Peter Waldus.

Savonarola, the eccentric Dominican of Florence, who lost his life

because of his unfortunate political activities and his schismatic at-

titude towards Pope Alexander VI, to some extent shared the stormy
temperament of Luther, but he kept aloof from heresy. It has been
aptly said of his peculiar posture on the monument of Worms

that it appeared as if he wished to run away because he felt he did
not fit in properly with Luther’s company. Finally, there is Reuchlin,
the scholarly founder of Hebrew philology, who remained a loyal
Catholic. After a lengthy conflict concerning his theories of the

Talmud, his book, “Augenspiegel,” was prohibited by Leo X, chiefly
on account of the undue use the young German humanists and incipient Lutherans made of his name. It was only the desire of
14 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, p. 25.

84

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

throwing Luther into greater relief which procured for this learned
writer an unmerited place on the monument at Worms.
)
The demand for so-called forerunners of the Reformation originated in a tendency of the nineteenth century, which has now been
more or less overcome. Scholars admit the disparity of the ways which
led away from Rome and regard it as superfluous to posit any precursors for the great and original Luther.

It must be admitted, however, that in the theological schools of

Luther’s day there were certain preparations for his doctrine. The
evidence for this statement is supplied by a glance at Nominalism,
particularly in the form in which it was taught by Ockham. True,

at the close of the Middle Ages philosophical and theological Nominalism prevailed in many universities, without any particular injury or separatism. The eminent nominalist Gabriel Biel was quite
orthodox in his teaching. But here and there dangerous errors crept
in with the Nominalism inspired by the singular mind of William
of Ockham. Young Luther absorbed some of these with his read-

ing. “I am a member of Ockham’s school” (factionis Occamicae),

he says and acknowledges this passionate and schismatic partisan of

Lewis the Bavarian in his contest with the papacy as his teacher.
Not as though he had educated himself by means of Ockham’s
politico-ecclesiastical writings, or that he had imbibed that author’s
so-called conciliar theories. But certain philosophical and theologi-

cal views of Ockham and his disciple, Peter d’Ailly, did not fail to
influence him and several other theologians of the Augustin
ian
Order.
Ockham disputed the philosophical demonstrability of the
existence of
God, of the freedom of the will, and of the spirituality
of the soul. He
taught that these truths can be known with perfect certitude
only through

faith. A proposition may be false in philosophy but
true in theology. The
ultimate cause of the eternal law and of the distinction
between good and
evil is solely the divine will. Per se an unworthy individu
al might be found
worthy of eternal life if God has so willed it. All
depends upon the will
of God (theory of acceptation); and no supernatural
babitus is necessary in
the just.
It is not difficult to discern a trace of these Ockham
ist errors in the
teaching of Luther. What is more important is
that Luther, going beyond
Ockham, took that external imputation which
the latter propounded only

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

85

as a possibility, for a reality and entirely eliminated sanctifying grace.
Luther, like Ockham, taught that the same thing need not be true in
_ philosophy as well as in theology. His repression of reason and his disregard

of ecclesiastical authority were characteristics of Ockham. Both led him
to assign to the emotions or to internal divine inspiration the rank of evidence, which, independently of the teaching of the Church, assured man of
the true meaning of Holy Writ. The arbitrariness of God according to Ockham confirmed Luther in his dread of predestination. Finally, it is easy to see
how Ockham’s disregard of true Scholasticism must have reacted upon
Luther’s attitude towards the old school.
Gabriel Biel, whose works young Luther likewise studied, kept aloof
from the Ockhamist errors, for which reason Luther attacked him and the

“Gabrielists.” Biel, under the influence of Ockham, unduly extended the
limit of man’s natural faculties in the realm of virtue, mistakenly appealing
to St. Thomas and the other great Scholastics in defense of his theory. Biel

minimized the effects of original sin, whereas Luther exaggerates them and
combats the “sophists” of Scholasticism, as though they were unanimous
in over-rating the powers of fallen man.
We are here confronted with the negative influence of Ockham. In con-

trast with what he had learned at school, Luther was led to adopt an extreme view, namely, the complete degradation of man’s natural powers

for good. This extreme antithesis confirmed him in his belief that all
things are produced by the omnipotence of God. It was for this reason
that he denounced the Scholastic theologians of the Middle Ages as well
as those of his own time as “swine theologians,” because they overestimated the powers of man and failed to appreciate the role of grace.
Rationalism and excessive criticism had gone too far in the Nominalistic
schools. Luther was not the only one who was frightened by this tendency.

But the true antidote did not consist in the extreme position adopted by
Luther, asserting the absolute impotence of reason in matters of salvation.
The negative influence of Ockhamism on Luther also appears in his use

of Holy Writ. Despite its appreciation of the Bible, Nominalism did not
properly avail itself of the truths of Sacred Scripture in its treatment of
theological questions. Guided by a correct sentiment, Luther opposes the
study of the Bible to the preponderance of dialectics and the neglect of
positive facts. But his preference for the Bible is extreme. According to him,
the “Word,” i. e., the word of God, is almost the only thing that should be
considered. The “Word” should abolish the evils of the world. It was but

a step from this attitude to proclaiming the Bible as the only source of
faith, to the exclusion of tradition and the Church.
Thus Nominalism, in its Ockhamistic form, appears to be one of the
factors which cooperated in the birth of the so-called Reformation,

86

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

partly in virtue of its positive, partly as a consequence of its negative, influence.®
§.

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

At the end of this rather lengthy discussion of the genesis and
contents of the Lutheran dogma it is proper to indicate briefly how
the principal doctrines of Luther were conformed to the personal
mood of their discoverer. The new theories of grace and justification, which were at first intended to quiet the monk afflicted
with a disordered temperament, were forthwith raised to a general
norm. Precisely because everything was so absolutely personal with
him, the discoverer of these ideas, so diametrically opposed to tradi-

tion, plunged into them with a vim that would be incredible were
it not evidenced by his writings, especially his lectures on the
Epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians, and by his disputations. His temperament furnishes the key to this remarkable phenomenon. He felt called upon to reveal to ignorant and misguided

humanity the truth- that had dawned on him——called by his office as
doctor of theology; called upon also to denounce all abuses of doctrine
and life. In reality the doctorate obliged him to teach according

to the mind of the Church, who had invested him with this dignity
and to whom he had promised obedience. He, on the contrary, proclaimed that he would speak freely because he had the apostolic

commission to teach. As a doctor, he said, it was his duty to re-

proach all, even those who occupied the highest places, if they were
guilty of wrong-doing.!® It does not occur to him that, if he was
desirous of effecting a genuine reform, he would have to direct his
censures to the proper places and utter them in a becoming manner, not by blustering in the pulpit or before immature students.

In fact, he does not reflect at all, but allows himself to be carried
away by his emotions. The fatal thing was that he believed himself to be moved by God.

Lacking the true concept of the Church and of ecclesiastical authority, the pseudo-mystic reformer believes that his ideas are in-

spired from above and his steps directed by God, whose guidance
18 For a more detailed exposition of the influence of Ockhamism
on Luther see Grisar,
Luther (Engl. tr.), Vol. I, pp. 1305qq., where the researches
of Denifle are utilized. The
relations of later Nominalism to the Lutheran heresy still
await complete clarification.

18 Op. cit.,, Vol. I, p. 228.

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

87

he professes to follow blindly. He is convinced that he is not seeking temporal advantages, and we may not gainsay him when he
declares that he is and desires to remain a poor monk. At the same
time he perceives, not without a basis in fact, an excessively large
number of evils in the life of Catholics. Their presence seems
to justify, nay, to challenge his intervention. Consequently, he rea-

sons, the efficacious hand of God must rest upon him, particularly
since he desires only to exalt Christ.
Later, too, he always firmly believed that he was acting in conformity with “God’s acts and councils,” though this conviction,
in matter of fact, did not persist in periods of “temptation.”
Reviewing the commencement of his career as a reformer, Luther

says that he went ahead “like a blinkered charger.” 17 Basing upon
his own example and his mystical theories he formulates the following
principle: “No good work happens as the result of one’s own wisdom;
but everything must happen in a stupor.” 18 It was not stupor nor
intoxication, however, that inspired the great churchmen of the
past to give expression to ideas that moved the world or to perform
their benign deeds (such as the renewal of medieval life by St.

Francis of Assisi, St. Dominic, and Gregory VII). Their achievements were the product of mature reflection, accompanied by humble
self-denial, fervent prayer, and close attachment to the heart of the

Church. They wrestled with difficulties without self-confidence.
Luther is so full of self-confidence that he regards every contradiction as a confirmation of his position. For, as he repeatedly declared,
both at the commencement of his career and afterwards, a good
cause is bound to meet with contradiction; in fact opposition proves
that it is acceptable to God.

And what about responsibility? *“Christ may witness, whether
the words I utter are His or mine; without His power and will

even the pope cannot speak.” Thus he writes to his fatherly friend
Staupitz after the great movement had begun.'® Despite the ravings
of our opponents, he continues, I must now appear in public, though
I have loved seclusion, and would much rather have preferred to be

a spectator of the stimulating intellectual movement of our age, than
to exhibit myself to the world. “I seek neither money, nor renown,
17 Op. cit., Vol. VI, p. 163.
18 Tischreden, Weimar ed., I, Nr. 406.

18 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 199 (May 30, 1518.)

88

PROGRESS OF THE NEW DOCTRINE

nor glory. 1 possess only my poor body, which is bowed down with
weakness and every kind of affliction. If I, whilst engaged in the

service of God, had to sacrifice it to the cunning or power of my
enemies, they would but shorten my life by one or two hours.” There
was no conquering such self-conceit. The appearance of goodness is
a powerful motive. Luther during the entire progress of his tragic
monastic development was deceived to a certain degree by the semblance of goodness.2°

_

The result of his conflicts, as above described, though potentially
dangerous to Christianity, is attributable not so much to an evil will

or to any conscious intent to destroy, but rather to his abnormal character, to mystical “will-o’-the wisps,” and to the prevalence of unusual
abuses. It was not internal “corruption” that showed him the way;
we have no proofs for such an assumption; but he was goaded by a
combination of less culpable factors. In the background there always
threatened the terrors of a just God and eternal predestination. The
moral phenomena attending his first public appearance, the defects of
his character, and his prejudice against good works, would seem to
decide the question of responsibility against him. He incurred a clear
and terrible responsibility when he was confronted by the adverse decision of the Church and her threat of excommunication. That he
refused to submit to the divinely appointed authority was the great
fault which entailed his ruin.
20 Characteristic parallel traits are observable at the beginning of the last century in
the religious Separatists in Bavaria, who also arrived at the Lutheran doctrine of justification by faith alone, etc. Cf. the articles on “Boos” and “Gossner” in the Kirchenlexikon.

CHAPTER V

FROM THE INDULGENCE THESES TO THE DISPUTATION
AT LEIPSIC (1517-1519)

I. THE

CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

In consequence of recent researches on the development of Luther,
far less significance is to be attached to the celebrated controversy
on indulgences which followed the theses of 1§17, than tradition
has ascribed to it. The ninety-five theses nailed to the door of the
Wittenberg castle-church do not mark the commencement of the
Protestant Reformation. As we have heard Luther himself intimate,
the initium evangelii is to be sought in the new theology of Wittenberg and in the public movement which it created. The controversy
concerning indulgences simply caused the movement to assume universal proportions. It placed the monk Luther upon the stage of
the world and offered him an opportunity of gradually unveiling
his revolutionary doctrine before all his contemporaries.

There was no room for indulgences in a system of grace and
justification which attacked the meritoriousness of good works and
the value of atonement.
Even before these ideas had fully matured (July 27, 1516), Luther

delivered a sermon in which he expressed himself correctly on the

Catholic doctrine of indulgences. Succeeding ages could have been
benefited by his instructions. He correctly emphasized that an indulgence is not a remission of the guilt of sin, but “a remission of
the temporal punishment due to sin, which the penitent would have
to suffer, be it that it was imposed by the priest, be it that he had
to suffer for it in purgatory.” “In the gaining of a [plenary] indulgence, therefore,” he says in conformity with the belief of the
age in which he lived, “one may not then and there feel sure of

salvation.” “Only those gain a plenary remission of punishment who
have become reconciled to God by true contrition and confession.”

At that time Luther still knew and appreciated the value of indul89

