CuAPTER XII

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530
1. CHARLES V, CLEMENT VI, AND THE TURKS

The first war between Charles V and Francis I of France ended in
the defeat of the French at Pavia, on February 24, 1525, and the capture of their king. The imperial army, composed of Spaniards, Italians,

and the dreaded German lansquenets, won a decisive victory. The
treaty of peace concluded at Madrid between Charles and Francis on
January 14, 1526, was entirely too severe for France. The release of
the King was purchased at an exorbitant price.

Pope Clement VII, an astute politician, was of the opinion that the
treaty and the oath of King Francis were not binding because they
had been obtained by force. It has been frequently asserted that he
formally released the King from his oath; but the statement is uncertain. ! Nevertheless the Pope, fearing the ascendancy of the Em-

peror in Italy, and apprehensive of his own position in Rome, unfortunately shaped his policies to favor Francis. This proved fatal to the

status of the Church in Germany. The action of the Emperor and the
Empire against the religious upheaval was paralyzed by the demands
made upon the latter in the war-like complications which had arisen,
especially in Italy. The so-called Holy League of Cognac, which had
been formed in opposition to the Emperor between certain Italian
States and France, strengthened by the accession of the Pope, led to
a profound schism between the supreme spiritual and the first temporal authority in Christendom.

In the new conflict between the Franco-Italian and the imperiaail
forces, which lasted from 1526 to the “Ladies’ Peace” of Cambr
the mu(1529), Rome was stormed and fearfully sacked in 1527 by
tinous soldiers under Bourbon, the imperial field-marshal, and George
von Frundsberg, the commander of the L andsknechte.” The capital

of Christendom, degraded by the morals of the Renaissance, suffered
1 Pastor, Geschichte der Pipste, Vol. IV, Part 11, p. 208.
»

.

323

324

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

a most abject decline. Clement VII, made a prisoner in the Castle of
Sant’ Angelo, was compelled to sign a humiliating capitulation and
lived in exile at Orvieto and Viterbo until he was able to return to
Rome, on October 6, 1528. The Emperor was exceedingly alarmed
at the capture and humiliation of Rome, which were contrary to his
intentions, and was told by Francesco Quifiones, the intrepid General
of the Franciscan Order, that if he did not hasten to fulfill his obligations toward the Pope, it would be impossible to call him emperor
henceforth; men would prefer to regard him as Luther’s captain,
since the Lutheran mercenaries had committed the most disgraceful
atrocities in his name and under his banner. 2

Luther, on his part, was jubilant at the course of events. When
apprised of the misfortune that befell the Eternal City, he wrote to
his confidant, pastor Hausmann of Zwickau: “Rome and the Pope
have been miserably devastated. Thus Christ governs, since the Emperor, who, being in the service of the Pope, persecutes Luther, is

compelled to destroy the Pope on behalf of Luther. Thus Christ must
do everything for the sake of His own and against the enemy.” 3 In
another letter, however, he says: “I would not like to see Rome

burned; for it would be too prodigious a sign.” * Melanchthon, the
humanist, was disturbed rather at the destruction of the ancient
classical sites. °
In consequence of the conciliatory attitude of Charles V and the
overtures made by the Pope to the Emperor, a reconciliation was ef-

fected between them. Charles V was crowned emperor at Bologna
by Clement VII on February 24, 1530. It was bruited about, how-

ever, that he did not intend to allow the Papal States to attain to complete sovereignty and independence.® His long separation from

Germany was a source of grievous injury to Catholicism as against
the reform movement. After the Emperor’s energetic stand at Worms

his failure to intervene in Germany was regretted. The loyal adher-

ents of the Church loudly clamored for his return. But they were disappointed from year to year. In 1530, when the diet assembled at
Augsburg, the Emperor returned temporarily to the field of German
activity, which was very much desired by himself, as the country was
21bid., p. 311.
30n July 13, 1527; Bricfwechsel, VI, p. 69.
#On November 11, 1527 to Jonas; Briefwechsel, VI, p.
117.
8 Cf. Corp. Ref., Vol. 1, n. 445; XI, p. 130.
8 Pastor, I. c., pp. 382 sq.

CHARLES V, CLEMENT VII, AND THE TURKS

32§

in a sorry religious plight. The complaint was heard that neither the
Emperor nor the Pope was properly informed about the condition of
the Church in Germany.
Besides the absence of the Emperor and the disturbances in Italy,
the events on the eastern.boundary of the Empire proved of great ad-

vantage to Lutheranism. These events completely engaged the attention and the strength of the imperial regent, Ferdinand of Austria.
The approaching danger of a Turkish invasion diverted the thoughts
of the princes who remained loyal to the Empire, from the religious
question.

During his captivity, the French king had appealed to Sultan
Soliman for aid. Since his victory over the Knights of St. John on the
Island of Rhodes, Soliman was consumed with a strong desire to resume the ancient campaign of the Crescent against the West. He invaded Hungary with an immense army and defeated King Louis, a

brother-in-law of Charles V, at Mohacz on the Danube. The King
succumbed in a morass on his flight (1526). His crown, together

with that of Bohemia, passed over to Ferdinand of Austria. The danger to Germany remained, yea, became even more aggravated, since
Ferdinand’s rival in Hungary, John Zapolya of Transylvania, favored
the Turks. In order to protect Zapolya, Soliman renewed his attack
and besieged Vienna (1529), but was repulsed.

Luther for a long time maintained his unfavorable attitude
towards united action against the Turks, but finally perceived its
necessity.

The cause of his well-nigh inexplicable attitude of aloofness was
the prominent participation of the papacy in the Turkish war. By
virtue of its primacy, its ancient activities at the head of the Christian
family of nations, and its traditional efforts to check the expansion
of infidelity, the papacy was the natural leader in this movement.

Luther’s pseudomystical state of mind originally inclined him to regard the Turks as a scourge of God which neither could nor ought to

be resisted, and to expect that that portion of Christendom which
suffered from this scourge would accept his gospel. 7 One of his
theses, which was formulated in opposition to the Turkish wars, was
condemned among other errors in the Bull “Exurge” of Leo X in
1520.% Luther naturally sustained this theses with all the more energy.
7 Cfr. his letter to Spalatin, December 21, 1518 (Briefwechsel, 1, p. 333).
B Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1II, p. 78.

326

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

He accused the Pope of selfish and imperialistic designs because of
his demand for a crusade against the Turks.® In an impassioned
treatise, “T'wo Discordant Imperial Commandments” (1524), he
wrote: “We refuse to obey and to march against the Turks or to
contribute to this cause, since the Turks are ten times cleverer and
more devout than our princes.” Because the Catholic princes had re-

jected his demands at the diet of Nuremberg, he delivered himself

thus in opposition to their resolution in favor of the crusade: “How
can such fools [the princes], who tempt and blaspheme God so
greatly, expect to be successful against the Turks?” The Emperor—
“a perishable bag of worms”—shamelessly constitutes himself, together with the Pope, the supreme defender of the Christian religion,”
whereas “the divine power of the faith has no need of a protector.” 1°
He delights in repeating his assurance that “the government of the
Pope is ten times worse than that of the Turk. . . . If ever the Turks

were to be exterminated, it would be necessary to begin with the
Pope.”” 11

Thus he availed himself of the extreme need of Christendom to
agitate against Rome and to promote the interests of his own cause.

When, finally, in 1529, Vienna was threatened and cries of alarm
rang through Europe, he changed his tone. In his little book “On the

War against the Turks” he now demanded protection against the
Turks and asked that they be proceeded against as robbers and de-

stroyers; but there was to be no crusade such as had been undertaken
against the infidels in the foolish days of old.!2

The edict of Worms had been renewed at Augsburg, where it was
further resolved that arrangements be made for a “free general council” to be assembled at some accessible place in Germany. The diet
of Spires, in 1526, was forced to wage an even greater battle with

the partisans of the new religion who had increased their forces in
the interim. Its efforts were but partially successful. The diet, it is

true, received a declaration from the Emperor attesting his firm
resolve to act. He left no doubt that he meant to uphold the edict

of Worms and its demands upon the cities and princes. Nevertheless

Electoral Saxony and Hesse boldly led the other friends of Luther9 Ibid., p. 79.
10 1bid., p. 77.

W 1bid., pp. 79 sq.

12 1bid., p. 81.

CHARLES V, CLEMENT VII, AND THE TURKS

327

anism in their resistance. If the edict of Worms were upheld, the
partisans of the reform movement now threatened to refuse their
assistance in the war against the Turks and the necessary contributions for the support of the imperial government. This placed

Ferdinand of Austria and the Catholic party in a quandary. Finally
the regulation of affairs was once more deferred until the convoca-

tion of a general council, which was definitely expected. The recess
stated in rather doubtful language that, pursuant to the edict of
Worms, the estates had “unanimously agreed, in matters pertaining
thereto, so to live with their subjects, to govern, and to conduct
themselves, as each expects and trusts to be held accountable for to
God and his imperial majesty.”

Was this a legal recognition of the new system of territorial

churches?

It has been so afirmed, but without any warrant. What is true is

that the elastic statement was thus interpreted at an early date.

The declaration, however, “does not imply what was inferred from it; the
right of reformation could be deduced neither from its wording, nor from
its origin, nor from its spirit.” ** “One can scarcely say that this formula
granted a formal right to the evangelicals to secede from the ecclesiastical
communion and to institute a reformation on their own responsibility.” 1*

The wish of the Emperor, referred to in the formula, was quite clear. Then,
too, the diet of Spires only intended to promulgate a temporary norm of peace
until the assembly of a general council. True, the edict of Worms was not
formally renewed, but the German estates could hold themselves “account-

able to the imperial majesty” only for conduct in conformity with that edict.
Luther himself during the first three years never interpreted the proposition
in question as a legal foundation justifying the formation of national
churches. It must be admitted, however, that the expression was ambiguous,

and can be explained only as a sorry expedient in the situation created by
the opposition. It is more excusable in the light of the diet’s concomitant
appeal to a general council; for this appeal the diet presupposed, “not the
dissolution, but rather the acknowledgment of ecclesiastical jurisdiction.” *®

The misuse to which the recess of the diet of Spires was subjected,
promoted the development of territorial churches of the new religion
13 A. Kluckhohn in the Histor. Zeitschrift, Vol. LVI, p. 217.

Vol, III,
14 . Friedensburg, Der Reichstag zu Speier 1526, p. 482. Cfr. Janssen-Pastor,
'

pp. 53 sq.; also Késtlin-Kawerau, II, p. 27.
15 Janssen-Pastor, /. c.

328

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

which were in process of formation. A fine opportunity was fur-

nished by the delay in the execution of the edict of Worms. Philip

of Hesse had a synod held at Homberg in 1526, under the presidency
of a Frenchman, the apostate Franciscan, Francis Lambert of Avignon.
This body drafted a radically new ecclesiastical regimen, based upon a
purely synodical constitution. Mainly on account of Luther’s opposi-

tion, however, this regimen was never enforced. On the contrary, the
landgrave himself assumed the government of the Church and ruled
it as supreme territorial bishop. The monasteries were suppressed,
sacred images in the churches and shrines abolished, and the ritual
ruthlessly altered.
Philip’s personal interest in religion was so feeble that, after his
change of religion, he partook of the Eucharist but once in fifteen
years and lived persistently in adultery and public vice. According
to his own confession he did not observe conjugal fidelity towards
his wife Christina for even three weeks. As early as 1526 he har-

bored the idea of taking a second wife during the lifetime of his
first spouse—a design which he executed on March 4, 1540, with

the sanction of the Wittenberg reformers, as will be set forth in the

sequel.

2. LUTHER AND THE STATE CHURCH OF SAXONY

In the Saxon Electorate, which was his home, Luther urged the introduction of visitations by commissioners to be nominated by the
secular ruler. This he did with increased zeal, the longer matters
were delayed by the prince, who proceeded in an arbitrary and auto-

cratic manner. The decadence of morals and discipline forced him

to take this stand.

He deplored “the ingratitude of the people for the holy Word of God.”
“They live like swine,” he says. “There is no longer any fear of God nor
discipline, because the jurisdiction of the Pope has ceased and everyone now

does as he pleases. . . . If the elders do not want to, let them go to the devil
for all T care. But where youth is neglected and raised without discipline,
the authorities are to blame, and the land will be filled with dissolute

savagelzz.” Thus Luther to the Elector John of Saxony, on November 22,
1526.

In respect to parishes and schools he adds: “Since religious compulsion
is
18 Erl. ed., Vol. LIII, pp. 386 sqq.

(Briefwechsel, V, p. 406).

|

THE STATE CHURCH OF SAXONY

329

at an end and all cloisters and foundations fall into the hands of the prince
as the supreme ruler, there arises the duty and inconvenience of regulating
such matters, to which no one else attends and in which no one can or should

be interested.” He contends that God has “summoned the prince to attend
to these matters in such an event.”

He demands, therefore, that the prince should entrust the visitation, which had already begun in a tentative way, to four persons,

two of whom were to manage the property and stipends, while the

other two—they should go about the matter with “discretion”—

were to be entrusted with the regulation of doctrine and personnel.
The Elector’s instruction, which followed in 1527, prescribes the
course of the visitation and presupposes a direct right of the State
in spiritual matters, 17 formally setting up the territorial government
of the Church which was already in existence. In doing so, however,
the Elector to some extent exceeded the wishes of Luther, who, accordingly, wrote a preface to the “electoral instruction” which in
some respects amounted to a restriction. Luther tries to preserve

a certain autonomy for the Church and to prevent the danger of a
ruinous dependence. In the preface which he added to the published

edict of the prince, he tries to justify the extensive measures which
the territorial lord was about to exercise in the sphere of religion
by the distressed condition of the Church and the fraternal duty
of a Christian ruler, whom he characterizes as an “emergency

bishop.” But his suggestions were disregarded and proved futile.
They are an ineffectual monument of his vacillation and embar-

rassment in a question of fundamentals, namely, the authentic con-

cept of the Church. The voice of the court and its jurists, and the
facts created by the government were mightier than the vague and
impotent aspirations of Luther.

The ideas of the territorial government were, however, influenced

by an humble invitation extended to the Elector John by a friend
of Luther. In this invitation the Elector was styled a prince “of sacred
Christian lineage and descent” and exhorted to ameliorate the conditions of the Church by becoming an example to other rulers and
following in “the heroic footsteps” of the pious Jewish king, Josa-

phat. The religious functions of the kings of ancient Israel were held
up to him as worthy of emulation—an exhortation “afterwards fre17 Weimar ed., Vol. XXVI, pp. 195 sqq.; Erl. ed,, Vol. XIII, pp. 1 sqq.

330

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

quently repeated by the evangelicals.” 1® There is no mention of the
prince’s functions being restricted by the distressed condition of the

Church, nor of fraternal duty; but the ruler, in virtue of his plenary
powers as prince, is competent to exercise authority over the churches.
In the name of the territorial ruler, Melanchthon supplemented
these general instructions by ‘a set of additional “articles” for the
guidance of the visitators. They concerned the method of teaching

and set up a church discipline effective throughout the country. These
supplementary articles met with Luther’s approval and, after having
been examined and supplemented several times, by order of the Elector, were formally promulgated.
Many individuals, both Lutherans and Catholics, were astonished
at the reactionary nature of these articles, which cautioned against
a declaration of the forgiveness of sins by faith alone, without previous penance. The law which penalized sin was emphasized much
more forcefully than Luther had been wont to do. As a result,
Luther had to hear the objection: “We are crawling backwards
again.” Nevertheless, he stuck to his approbation of the articles of

visitation and remarked that they determined everything in the
simplest possible manner for the benefit of the mob; the objections

of the dissenters, he predicted, would soon cease.!®
In 1528, he himself composed a set of “Instructions for the Visitators,” which was introduced into the territory of Duke Henry of

Saxony in 1538, and into the bishopric of Naumburg in 1545. Having become quite disillusioned in consequence of his experiences,

Luther began to yield considerably in the matter of law and penance.
When his pupil, John Agricola, raised strong objections to the proposed modifications, Luther opposed him.
On account of doctrinal differences, Agricola, at Eisleben, vehemently opposed Melanchthon, with whom he was at personal enmity.
In general, he combated penance and, in part, the rules of a devout
life. A satire on the Wittenberg theologians classified him as an
Epicurean, *“a discriminating voluptuary who knows how to choose

among pleasures.” His opposition to Luther at a subsequent period
caused the latter serious trouble in the so-called antinomian con-

troversy. At the same time, however, it gave him an occasion
to

recede to an even greater extent from his original attitude toward law
18 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Lutber, Vol. II, p. 25,
19 1bid., p. 31.

THE STATE CHURCH OF SAXONY

331

and penance. “The first official act of the evangelical State Church
(the announcement of the visitation) thus became an occasion of
strife, yea, of charges of heresy within the most intimate circles of the
reformatory theologians of Wittenberg.” 2°
The protocols of the visitators show the existing conditions among

the people, their preachers and new pastors, in the years 1527 to
1529, and later. It is not worth while to enter upon the melancholy
details. Luther’s summary complaint in a letter to Spalatin will suffice: “Everywhere the congregations present a deplorable picture,
since the peasants neither learn, nor pray, nor do anything else but
abuse their freedom; they neither confess, nor go to communion, as
if they had completely cast off religion.” 2! He adds: “Just as they
spurned the papal system, so now they condemn ours.” It is only fair
to remark that no such conditions existed under the papacy. The new
gospel of liberty and the Peasants’ War which sprung from it had

brought a return to barbarism. The vain excuse has recently been
put forth that the protocols of the Lutheran visitators exhibit a
state of decadence which “originated in the religious life of the Catholic past.” 22 Though, as we have seen, the Catholic ages had their
shortcomings, it was nevertheless to be expected that a thoroughgoing religious movement, such as the Reformation claimed to be,

should have produced a reform precisely at its inception. Indeed it
should have manifested decided signs of the spiritual spring which
Luther had persistently announced, especially when, in his extrava-

gant manner, he spoke of the breath of God which would renew all
things without violence.

An endeavor was made to increase the effectiveness of the visitations

by creating the permanent office of superintendent. It was another seal
affixed to the State Church. The office was established by the Elector
in his instructions governing visitations for 1527, and entrusted to the
pastors of the principal cities. It was their duty to supervise the belief,

teachings, and official functions of the clergy within their respective
jurisdictions and to report those who obstinately persisted in error to
the officials appointed by the prince, and through these to the terri-

torial lord. Where else was there authority that could inflict punish-

ment?

20 Tbid.

21 Middle of January(?), 1529; Briefwechsel, VII, p. 4s.
22 Kgstlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 4o.

332

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

In order to fortify the new religious system still more, the German
Mass was introduced for Sundays, to be uniform throughout Electoral
Saxony. It was an arrangement suggested by the territorial lord.
Luther had elaborated a set of hymns with the assistance of John

Walther, of the castle of Torgau, which was submitted to the Elector
towards the end of 1525. This Mass was prescribed for all the pastors
in the articles of visitation and was to be introduced with the least
possible disturbance. The article pertinent to this point cautiously
says: “It is not necessary to preach extensively to the laity about it.”
The deceptive resemblance to the Latin Mass was retained.
In all these ordinances there was not one word relative to that assembly of *“genuine and freely confessing Christians’ which Luther
had regarded as desirable. The ideal was interred in consequence of the
sad results of the visitation. In lieu thereof, the new church was overrun by unspiritual members, whom Luther calls “pagans,” and developed more and more into a compulsory organization. The Ana-

baptists and other fanatics who rebelled against its doctrines, were
severely penalized. Luther even went so far as to demand the penalty
of decapitation for such heretics as were found guilty, not of insurrection against the State, but of a fundamental deviation from his
doctrine.?3

Walter Kohler, a leading Protestant historian of the Reformation, writes of
the tendency resulting from the regulations governing the visitations due to
Luther’s intervention: “Capital punishment for heresy was legitimized by
the Lutheran authorities. . . . Freedom of conscience and of religion was

out of the question with Luther.” According to this writer, there is no doubt

that the trial of heretics by the Protestant churches was introduced by
Luther. When the preaching of the Word proved ineffectual, he appealed
to the secular autharities, with whom he was closely allied.2¢

The Protestant scholar, P. Wappler, who has made a special study

of the Protestant proceedings against heretics, and also of the Anabaptist
movement, shows by a number of concrete cases how, shortly after
the inception of the visitations, Luther decided in favor of the execution of
heretics, especially on account of the teachings of the Anabaptists. “The
many
executions,” says Wappler, “of Anabaptists who are known
not to have

been revolutionaries and who were put to death on the strength of
the
declarations of the Wittenberg theologians, refute only too plainly
all
23 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, index s. v. “Intolerance” and “Heretics.”
24 For the resp. passages see Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 266.

THE STATE CHURCH OF SAXONY

333

attempts to deny the clear fact that Luther himself approved of the death
penalty against such as were merely heretics.” 2°

The formula which Luther applied to representatives of the new

heresies was that they were to be remanded to “Master Hans,” i. e,

handed over to the executioner. At Rheinhardsbrunn, for example,
six heretics were simultaneously remanded to Master Hans towards

the close of 1529 and the beginning of 1530, and were decapitated on

January 18, 1530. Of the inquisition of laymen which was provided
for in the electoral regulations of 1527, Wappler justly observes:
“The principles of evangelical freedom of belief and liberty of con-

science, which Luther had championed two years earlier, were most

shamefully repudiated by this lay inquisition;” and yet Luther said

never a word in protest.

An impartial and critical Catholic historian, Dr. Nicholas Paulus,
has filled 2 whole volume with convincing evidence of the intolerance

of the leaders of the religious schism, particularly Luther and Melanchthon, which went even so far as to recommend capital punish
ment. 26

Whilst obstinate denial of the faith was to be avenged thus severely,
—a measure which, of course, it was impossible to carry out universally—an attempt was made to penalize also gross violations of the
moral law within the religious communities. The lack of the Catholic
ban was perceptible. The object of the regulations governing visitations was to discipline notorious sinners by a refusal of the Lord’s supper. Luther’s first aim was to have obstinate sinners declared pagans

in the eyes of the congregation, after a futile warning in the presence of
witnesses. Later he decided in favor of greater severity by adopting
2 kind of excommunication. Various efforts on the part of others to

install elders for the supervision of morals were condemned to failof
ure.2” The only measure that was finally retained was the officehad
1529,
in
d
uttere
’s
Luther
of
phrase
beadle, who, according to a
might
to hale those to church who despised the catechism, so that they
catethe
learn
to
d
scorne
er
Whoev
etc.
learn the Ten Commandments,
chism, he said, should be exiled by the civil authorities.?®
25 Ibid., p. 267.

26 protestantismus und Toleranz im 16. Jabrbundert, 1911.
27 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 47.

28 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 484 sq.

334

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

3. NEW DOCTRINAL AND CONTROVERSIAL WRITINGS

Luther’s efforts to regulate doctrine and religious discipline are associated with the publication of his two catechisms, which have attained great significance. They originated in three series of catechetical
sermons preached in 1528. At that time it was a prescribed custom
at Wittenberg to preach week-day sermons on the catechism four
times a year, for two consecutive weeks.

“The Little Catechism, for children and simple folk,” first appeared
in the form of tables, designed to be affixed to various parts of the

home according to Catholic custom. Its arrangement, particularly
the sequence of Commandments, profession. of faith, and *“Cur
Father,” also followed the old tradition. A section on Baptism and
another on the Eucharist were appended. Its arrangement in the form
of questions and answers is a model of simplicity and clearness.
Though heterodox doctrines are emphasized in the Little Catechism,
polemical attacks upon the ancient Church are avoided. In the preface,
however, the bishops are blamed for the ignorance of Christian
doctrine existing among the common people, especially in the villages.??
The Large Catechism was intended to instruct pastors and to enable
them to explain the smaller one in their sermons. It is not composed in
the form of questions and answers, and is rather prolix. Nevertheless,
certain characteristic doctrines, which were apt to give rise to dispute,
are omitted, as in the case of the smaller book. Thus the readers are not

informed of their right to pass judgment on the Bible and on matters
of faith, two things formerly so strongly emphasized by Luther. Its
pages are silent on the doctrine of original sin as the destroyer of every

inclination to good, on the enslaved will, and on predestination.

The two catechisms were very widely adopted and often reprinted.
Numerous Electoral regulations provided for their propagation and

use. In 1580 they were incorporated in the “Book of Concord” and

thereby raised to the rank of symbolical writings of the Lutheran
Church.
It cannot be denied that the desire not to be outdone by Luther
proved very beneficial to the development of Catholic catecheti
cs.

The religious instruction of the people, it is true, had not been neg29 Jbid.

DOCTRINAL AND CONTROVERSIAL WRITINGS

335

lected. To them Luther holds up his own example. Even in his manner of presentation he completely followed the old method.?® But the
‘copiousness and systematic method of Catholic religious instruction
necessitated a certain gradation. It became necessary that it should be

transferred from the home, to which it had been previously entrusted,
to the school and the church. Then, too, the existing and quite esti-

mable number of elementary text-books had to be multiplied. The
splendid work of Peter Canisius perfected the great amount of good
literature which was already in existence.

Luther believed himself justified in stating that, prior to his time, there
had been “no doctor on earth who had known the whole of the catechism,
that is, the Our Father, the Ten Commandments and the Creed, much less

understood them and taught them as now, God be praised, they are taught
and learned even by little children. In support of this I appeal to all their
books, those of the theologians as well as those of the lawyers. If even one
article of the catechism can be learnt aright from them, I shall allow myself
to be broken on the wheel or bled to death.” 3 He is better advised when he
recommends people to occupy themselves with the study of the catechism. He

makes his recommendations in a2 manner characteristic of himself. In the
preface to the Large Catechism he tells his preachers that whoever does not

heed and abide by the catechism, is to be classified with the “shameful

gluttons and belly-servers, who are better fitted to look after the pigs and
the hounds than to be pastors having the cure of souls.” * Daily, every
morning and evening, he himself, though a doctor and preacher, recited “the

The
Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Our Father, etc., like a child.”
occupy
to
always
and
well
e
practic
“to
pastors
all
preface exhorts
al ideas, in prothemselves with” the catechism, and contains many practic
ptuous saints,
presum
or
bellies
posing which Luther pleads with those “lazy
have borne
words
His
ded.”
persua
be
lves
that, for God’s sake, they let themse

fruit, and in many Protestant districts his catechisms have established and
sustained positive Christian beliefs.

Thus, in 1§26,
Other minor writings support the Little Catechism.
sm, which supplied

he wrote a little treatise on the ceremonies of Bapti
arian formula and
the majority of Lutheran churches with the ltrinit
on the Marriage
the exorcism. In 1529, he composed a “SmalisedBook
ar influence on
Ceremony for Simple Pastors,” which exerc , athesimil
nuptial ceremony
the marriage rite. According to the latter work
30 1bid., pp- 489 sqq31 1bid., p. 48582 Jbid.

336

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

is a blessing joined with prayer, freely solicited by the bridal couple,
but not necessary for the validity of marriage.
At the head of his treatise “Von Ehesachen,” 33 which he commenced in 1529 and published in 1530, as well as in other writings,
Luther enunciates the doctrine, which he makes the basis and startingpoint of his instructions, that Matrimony is not a Sacrament, but
““a purely temporal matter, such as raiment and food, house and courtyard, subject to secular authority.” The matrimonial problems with
which he had been overwhelmed, had crushed him. After the Catholic
laws on matrimony had been discarded, great confusion inevitably
ensued, and this disorder was augmented by the Peasants’ War and the
moral decadence which followed. “I have a lot of trouble with it,”
he writes to Spalatin; “I resist strongly, cry out and exclaim that such
matters should be left to the secular authorities.” 3¢ In the treatise
mentioned, as elsewhere in his writings, he does not propose to give

any regulations pertaining to Matrimony, since temporal matters do
not pertain to the clergy and the Church has no right “to govern or to

enforce the law,” but her province is “to inform and console the
consciences.” Hence, he speaks oaly as one offering advice.
It is not necessary to demonstrate that his usual distinction between

the Church and the world, between the spiritual kingdom of Christ
and the external realm of the civil authority, between the forum of law
and the forum of conscience, was bound to involve him in vacillations

and contradictions, especially in the realm of Matrimony. An arbitrary
subjectivism all too frequently replaces objective law in his teaching.
Because this teaching—if it be possible to speak of uniform teaching

—sprang from the soil of his passionate attacks on the religious

vows
and sacerdotal celibacy, it had a sensuous and dangerous aspect. 3%

Nevertheless, he extols Matrimony as a dignified, yea, sublime insti-

tution of divine provenience and delineates the natural side of

conjugal

life in glowing phrases. He even boastfully claims that it was he who
“sang the praises” of the matrimonial state “in sermons, writings,
and
examples,” whereas the papists did not recognize harlotry as
a sin.38 It

is surprising to note how many Protestant writers repeat

this self-

33 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, III, pp. 205 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIII,
pp. 93 sqq.
34 Similarly in a letter to Spalatin, January 7, 1527
(Briefwechsel, VI, p. €), in conse-

quence of the experience “that mankind could
not be governed by the gospel.”
36 Cf. S. Baranowski, Luthers Lebre von der
Ebe, Miinster i. W., 1913, especially the
summaries at pp. 4 sqq. and 207 sqq.

36 Tischreden, Weim. ed., Vol. 1V, n. SII6.

DOCTRINAL AND CONTROVERSIAL WRITINGS

337

praise and at the same time overlook the tangible shortcomings inher-

ent in Luther’s theory of matrimony as well as the fatal consequences

~ of that theory when put into practice.

In his book “Von Ehesachen” Luther refrains from dealing with the
confused mass of questions which had arisen from the new concept
of Matrimony. For the jurists, even Schurf at Wittenberg, strictly defended many of the traditional canonical regulations and interpretations against his liberal notions. On the matrimonial impediments,
particularly those derived from consanguinity, as well as on divorce,
Luther expresses himself only in a cursory manner. He concedes
the right of divorce on the grounds of adultery and malevolent desertion.

One of the principal objects of this work is to combat clandestine

marriages contracted without parental consent. Matrimony, so he
teaches, is a public state of life and hence must be contracted publicly,
in the presence of witnesses and in the sight of the congregation.
Clandestine marriages contracted against the wishes of father and
mother or their representatives, are null and void. However, the
rights of parents should not be exaggerated. If parents wantonly prevent their children from marrying, he says, the civil authority or, in

the event of the latter’s refusal, the pastor, with the assistance of
worthy friends, should permit and confirm the marriage. Luther was
confronted with severe conflicts with the secular authorities because

of his opposition to the constantly increasing secret marriages, or

secret betrothals, as he termed them. Because of his vexatious experiences with matrimonial problems, his disgust increased to such an ex-

“I
tent that he subsequently wrote to Count Albrecht of Mansfeld:have
and
me
from
ges]
marria
ting
regula
have cast it [the matter of
written to several persons that, in the name of all the devils, they
should do as they see fit.” 3

of
Among other works written by Luther, mention shouldn bein made
®
1527,*
writte
nd,”
Engla
of
King
his “Reply to the Libel of the
which
in
VIII
Henry
of
reply
hed
—a crude rejoinder to the publis
previously enthe latter declined to co-operate with Luther, who had der
Luther says
rejoin
his
In
cause.
deavored to interest the King in his

only of princes and
that he “upholds his doctrine in defiance not
“On Secret and
tract
his
is
nt
kings, but of all the devils.” No less viole
(Briefwechsel, XI, p. 90).
87 October 5, 1536; Erl. ed., Vol. LV, p. 147
Vol. XXX, pp. 1 sqq.
ed.,
Erl.
sqq.;
26
pp.
88 Weimar cd., XVIII,

.

338

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

Purloined Letters,” 3° written in 1529 against Duke George of Saxony,
in connection with the affair of the alleged secret league of the Catholic princes for the destruction of Lutheranism, discovered by Otto
von Pack. Luther had written a letter on this subject to his friend
Link, which had come into the possession of the Duke and was made
public by him, to the chagrin of the writer. In this letter, as well as
in the tract written to defend it, Luther asserts the existence of the
League, which had already at that time been shown to be a myth, and

maintained that George and his counselors were possessed by the devil,
and consequently he (Luther) was constrained to believe that they
harbored most wicked designs. 4°
In 1527, Luther dedicated two treatises to the two “martyrs” of his

theological system, as he calls them. One of these is entitled, “Consolation to the Christians of Halle on the Death of their Preacher,
George [ Winkler]”; the other is a tract on “Leonard Kaiser, who was
Burnt in Bavaria for the Gospel.”” * Winkler had been attacked and

murdered in 1527 by unascertained culprits. Without proof, Luther

accuses the canons of Mayence of being accessories to the crime. The
second “martyr,” Leonard Kaiser (Kiser), was a Bavarian ex-priest

who had studied at Wittenberg and was executed at Schirding after
being tried for heresy by Ernest of Bavaria, administrator of the bishop

of Passau.
In his printed message “To the Christians of Bremen” 42 Luther
glorified several other “martyrs”: two Augustinians of Brussels; the
Augustinian Henry of Zitphen (Henry Miiller, died 1524); Caspar

Tauber, who was burnt at the stake in Vienna in 1524; a Lutheran
colporteur named George, who was executed in the same year at Ofen,
and an unknown individual of Prague. He pathetically exclaims that

“their blood would drown the papacy and its god, the devil.” 43
If several of his later utterances were taken seriously, many more
bloody victims of his party would have to be included among the

“martyrs” of the new faith. The number mentioned has been increased

by historical authorities; for the medieval laws against heretics

con-

89 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, II, pp. 25 sqq.; Erl. ed.,, Vol. XXXI,
pp. 1 sqq.

40 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 325 sq., V, P- 343.
41 Weimar ed., Vol. XXIII, pp. 401 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXII,
pp. 294 sqq. and Weim. ed.,
Vol. XXIII, p. 452; Briefwechsel, VI, pp. 156 sqq.

“2Erl. ed., Vol. XXVI, 2nd ed., pp. 40 $qq. (Briefwechsel,
V, p. 112.).
43 Letter to Hausmann, November 17, 1524; Erl. ed.,
Vol. XXVI, 2nd ed., p. 403

(Briefwechsel, V, p. 112).

DOCTRINAL AND CONTROVERSIAL WRITINGS

339

tinued in operation. According to Riezler it is possible to demonstrate

that in Bavaria, which was accused of being especially cruel, relatively
few obstinate heretics were executed. In Wiirttemberg, it appears,

capital punishment was more frequently inflicted upon apostate Cath-

olics. But it must be recalled that many of those who were executed
there and elsewhere were guilty of participation in the revolts connected with the Peasants’ War as well as of other crimes which constituted one of the grounds, if not the chief ground, for their execution. Others were put to death because of their Anabaptist doctrines
and machinations, which were dangerous to the State; and for this
reason Lutheranism cannot claim them as confessors. A case in point is
the frequently cited one of Balthasar Hubmaier, who, having come
into prominence as an apostle of the revolutionary Anabaptist move-

ment, was burnt at the stake in 1527. In every religious conflict there
the
have been deluded individuals who wrought up their errors tovery
their
risk
to
hesitate
not
did
and
s
madnes
point of dangerous
lives. The history of the severe laws formulated against heresy since
the early Middle Ages furnishes ample proof of this statement.

Among the polemical tracts which Luther issued against Catholic
worship, is his “Advice to a Dear Friend on Both Forms of the Sacrahed in
ment in Reply to the Mandate of the Bishop of Meissen,” publis
pracfor
d
decree
,
chalice
the
from
laity
1528. 4* The exclusion of the

chief grounds of
tical reasons by the Church, constituted one of the
en renewed his
Meiss
of
p
bisho
the
attack against her. When, in 1528,
laity, the Luthe
for
e
chalic
the
regulations proscribing the use of
to attack the
order
in
tions
regula
therans availed themselves of these
his fortulate
recapi
to
on
occasi
Church, and this afforded Luther an
ment
Sacra
the
of
tion
mer alleged proofs in support of the recep h, thus he declared inunder
both forms by the laity. The papal Churc at naught in this respecopt,
position to the bishop, sets the Word of God devil and the bride of

thereby proving that she is the Church of the
'
«
Satan.
lic replies
Catho
lent
of excel
The following two years saw a series easil
that the
ated
nstr
y demo
relative to the lay-chalice. The authorsform of
not
does
alone
bread
reception of the Eucharist under the t, as Luthe
the
to
ling
appea
r,
constitute a mutilation of the Sacramenst,” contende
ndemo
They
d.
alleged “clear, forceful words of ‘Chri
ainsep
were
strated that the blood of Christ as well as His divinity
44 Weimar ed., Vol. XXVI, pp. 560 5q9.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXX,

pp. 373 59a-

340

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

rably united with His body. The Church in introducing the custom of

giving the host alone to the laity, because of the danger that the consecrated wine be spilled or profaned, was within her rights, as she was
the administrator of the Sacraments for the glory of God. The demand for the chalice was not prompted by zeal for divine worship,
but rather founded upon a spirit of opposition and provocation, since
the adherents of the new religion did not exhibit any great activity in
the reception of the Eucharist, and since, moreover, most of them did
not desire to receive the Eucharist under either form. Among those

who defended the traditional practice we find, for example, the Dominican Michael Vehe of Halle, who, in a treatise, “On the Law of the
Reception of the Holy Sacrament,” composed in 1§31, which was a
model of objectivity and calmness, demonstrated the right of Cardinal Albrecht to prohibit the faithful at Halle to receive their Easter
communion under both species. %5
By means of popular polemical pictures Luther endeavored to
arouse the passions of the people against the papal Church. In a pamphlet, “A Vision of Friar Claus in Switzerland,” 46 published in 1528,

he circulated an alleged vision of the papacy had by Blessed Nicholas
von der Fliie, which, he pretended, exhibited to the world Rome’s
“tyrannical, murderous, bloody dominion over body and soul.” He

sees in this utterly unhistorical representation a dismal head, crowned

with a tiara, whence six pointed swords are projected. In Luther’s
mystical interpretation, the triply serrated beard signifies the three
classes of men who adhere to the pope, ‘“the sanctimonious, such as
monks, priests, and nuns; the scholars, such as jurists, theologians,

magistri; the mighty of the earth, such as kings, princes, and lords.”
The pamphlet is a mental aberration, corresponding to its author’s
frame of mind.

Very bitter, even if droll, are the supplements which he appends

to his “New Intelligence of Leipsic” and “The Fable of the Lion and
the Ass.” *7 Two authors of Leipsic, John Hasenberg and Joachim

von Heyden, had attacked Luther’s marriage to Catherine
of Bora.

The above-mentioned document was intended to be Luther’s

reply,

45 N. Paulus, Die Dominikaner im Kampf gegen Luther,
pp. 219 sq.
46 Weimar ed., Vol. XXVI, pp. 130 5qq.; Erl. ed., Vol.
LXIII, pp. 260 sqq. Cf. Grisar-

Heege, Luthers Kampfbilder, Vol. HI

especially p. 53.

(Lutherstudien, n. s), pp. 44—56, with illustrations,

47 Weimar ed.,_Vol. XXVI, pp. 539 sqq.; Vol. LIII,
pp. 549 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. LXIV, pp.

324 sqq. Cf. Grisar-Heege, l. c., pp.

37—44, with illustrations, especially p.
43.

LUTHER AND ZWINGLI

341

or, at any rate, a sort of reply. The former work is ornamented with

a square, in which the word ASINI is written with checkered letters
in such wise that, commencing with the center, the word “ass” can

be read forty times. The fate which, as he tells us, the writings of the

two Leipsic authors were to experience at his hands in his private

chamber cannot be described in decent language. The second of these
tracts depicts how the ass is made king of beasts; it is aimed at the pope,

whom the Leipsic professors honored, but whom Luther frequently
describes as “pope-ass.” An artistic illustration;, furnished by Cranach,
which accompanies the work, presents two young asses, asini Lipsienses,
holding a large crown above the head of a braying, lean old ass, which
is followed by two young prancing asses, carrying halberds on their
shoulders. The text ironically ascribes to the pope-ass “the ability to
administer both the temporal and the spiritual government” and asserts that there is “nothing about the entire ass which is not wosthy
of royal and papal honors.”
Quite serious was Luther’s literary warfare against the Anabaptists.
His “Address to Two Pastors on Rebaptizing,” published in 1528,
was particularly characteristic.#8 Contrary to the principal objection
of the rebaptizers, namely, that infants could not possibly have the

faith which Luther required as a condition for the efficacy of the
Sacrament, he obstinately asserts that children can and do have the
faith and denounces as a vain conceit the statement that they are as

yet devoid of reason. The constant practice of the Church supplies him
with a bulwark in support of Infant Baptism. The Church could not
have been permitted by God to remain in error for so long a time. He
speaks on this topic as if he did not accuse the preceding centuries of
the Christian era of the most glaring errors in other essential doctrines.

When he was in an agitated frame of mind, he took no account of such

contradictions.

The writings which were evoked by Luther’s controversy with

Zwingli occupy a special place among his literary productions.

4. ZWINGLI AND THE CONTROVERSY REGARDING THE LAST
SUPPER

In the celebrated controversy ‘on the Eucharist which arose between Luther and the quick-witted Swiss reformer Zwingli, two
48 Weimar ed., Vol. XXVI, pp. 144 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXVI, 2nd ed., pp. 2813sqq.

342

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

characteristic traits of Luther are made manifest. In the first place,
a more credulous tendency is discoverable in him, even to the extent of accepting the miraculous and

incomprehensible

features

of the doctrine of the Eucharist, as contrasted with the subtlety to
which Zwingli and his partisans, Oecolampadius and Bucer, inclined.
Secondly, there is discernible that uncouth controversial method
which seeks to put down an opponent by every available means of
rhetoric, even if it be never so insulting, combined with most questionable arguments. In the thought of mankind, the Last Supper is usually
enveloped by a divine peace. The Sacrament unites unto itself the souls
of men by the strongest bond of union ever bestowed upon mankind.

But now the holy table became the arena of a horrible quarrel which

was to last for a number of years and led to a desecration of the pearl
of Christian worship by the contending factions of the reformed re-

ligion.
The controversy was not confined to the two protagonists, Luther
and Zwingli, and their more intimate friends, but extended through-

out southern Germany, Switzerland, and the neighboring countries.

Zwingli, in virtue of his rationalistic conception of history, as set
forth in a letter written in 1524 to Alberus, in his “Commentary
on True and False Religion,” in which he discussed the words by
which Christ instituted the Holy Eucharist, had professed the following proposition: “The Lord understands by bread and eating
nothing but the gospel and the faith. . . . He absolutely does not

speak of any sacramental food.” The consecrated species, according

to his idea, are only a symbol of Christ, of His testament and His
grace; there is no Real Presence, which reason could not comprehend

and which appears contradictory, since the Body of Christ can be only
in one place, namely, in Heaven, at the right hand of His Father, and

‘not wherever the Lord’s Supper is celebrated.

The literary controversy with Zwingli was taken up on the
Lutheran side by Bugenhagen, whereupon Oecolampadius espoused the

cause of Zwingli by ‘his denial of the Real Presence. Luther had on

a

former occasion defended his teaching on the Eucharist against
Karlstadt and the “fanatics” and now repeatedly expressed himself

against Zwingli, whose bold attacks on the Eucharist filled him
with
indignation. He persistently classified Zwingli among the “fanatics
,”

though Zwingli had openly declared himself opposed to the
views
of Karlstadt. Hence, when Zwingli, in his * Amica Exegesis”
(1527),

LUTHER AND ZWINGLI

343

renewed and intensified his opposition to the doctrine of the Eucharist
as formulated by the Wittenberg divines, Luther drew his sword
against his rival of Zurich by means of a violent polemical tract
entitled, “That the Words: “This is my Body’ are Still Firmly Established.” ** Zwingli replied in a tract which bore the scarcely less
vigorous title, “That These Words . . . Shall Retain Their Same

Ancient Significance Forever.”

Luther at last determined to put an end to the controversy by

means of a final tract, which he entitled, “Profession of the Lord’s

Supper” (1528).5°
This tract is not merely a summary and expansion of the reasons which he
had hitherto advanced against the “abominable heresy” of the “three leaders
of the Sacramentarians,” Karlstadt, Zwingli, and Oecolampadius, as well as
the Silesian Schwenckfeld; but it is at the same time a solemn profession of
faith, to which he is resolved to adhere with increased firmness, now that

its articles have been imperiled by the Sacramentarians. He analyzes these
articles, commencing with that “on the divine Majesty, on the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost.” The earnestness with which he discusses this
article is touching. In this part of his work he is also desirous of marking his
attitude towards the Catholic Church. He condemns her doctrine of free-will
and sin, represents the Mass as an abomination exceeding all other abominations, rejects the invocation of the saints, and, relative to the Zwinglian
iconoclasts, asserts that, according to Holy Writ, sacred images are “very

useful;” finally, he contends that the Church consists in the communion or
assembly of all Christians without a hierarchy.

This so-called “Great Profession” made no impression upon the
opponents of Luther. Zwingli and Oecolampadius jointly published
a sharp reply. Luther, however, reverted only incidentally to the
great question of the Eucharist, until the memorable debate between

him and Zwingli at Marburg.

It cannot be denied that his presentation of the case against his
Swiss rival possesses certain merits in spite of obvious defects and the
injection of personalities. The necessity of adhering to the simple,
literal meaning of the words of institution is demonstrated by splendid arguments and with convincing clarity. The obligation of be49 Weimar ed., Vol. XXIII, pp. 64 sqq.; Erl.ed., Vol. XXX, pp. 14 sqq.—On the history
of the controversy cf. W. Kohler, Zwingli und Luther; ibr Streit iiber das Abendmabl nach

seinen politischen und religiésen Bezichungen, Vol. I, Leipsic, 1924.

50 Weimar ed., Vol, XXVI, pp. 261 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol, XXX, pp. 15135qq.

344

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

lieving religious truths that transcend human reason is emphasized
in inspiring words. If, he says, Christ after His Resurrection passed
through closed doors, then His glorified body in the Eucharist is
not bound by the ordinary laws of nature, and it is simply a question of submitting one’s intellect to the plain words of the Almighty.

He triumphantly appeals to the unequivocal belief of the Church
in the real presence, which she has held since the primitive period of

her existence. In these pages he is animated by the faith which he had
received in the days of his childhood and nurtured during his long
monastic career—a faith that resounds in the sonorous verses of the
Lauda Sion of St. Thomas Aquinas: “Quod non capis, quod non vides,
animosa firmat fides practer rerum ordinem.” He pretends to have
gained a most intimate conviction of the real presence of Christ by

personal experience, nay, even to have been instructed in this truth
by angels.

A comparison between the two antagonists reveals the fact that
both are guilty of monstrous theological errors. Luther stands on
Biblical ground with only one foot as it were; his head is enveloped
by theological and philosophical clouds which completely obscure the
truth. As regards his demonstration from the Bible, he hesitates to
make a logical application of the literal interpretation. He rejects the
Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and contends that the body of
Christ is simultaneously present with the bread. His arbitrariness is
manifested in his denial of the sacrificial character of the Eucharist as
maintained in the Bible.
In the theological and philosophical discussions of the past, this
sacred mystery, in as far as it was accessible to human reason, was
expressed in clear formulas. These Luther, because of his contempt for
Scholasticism, rejected as the product of *“sophists.” As a result, he
founders in his attempt to escape the objections of Zwingli, as when,

e. &, he asserts that the body of Christ is at the throne of God, but
also participates in the divine omnipresence, so that it is found everywhere throughout
the universe (ubiquity), and, hence, also in the
Eucharist.5! The important thing is, he says, that Christ, in virtue of 2
special promise, desired His presence to be tangible to us somewhere,
and this precisely in the Eucharist. In Luther’s opinion this “special
promise” of Christ as regards the Eucharist resides in His intention
S1Erl. ed., Vol. XXX, p. 67.

LUTHER AND ZWINGLI

345

to strengthen our faith through the Sacrament and thus to mediate
our salvation. Nevertheless, he maintains that infidels actually receive
Christ when they receive the Fucharist.
Zwingli objected that, according to Luther’s doctrine, the Sacrament does not constitute a thing sui gemeris, since there are other
and even more effective means of confirming faith in the divine
promises, and therefore a superfluous miracle is postulated. Luther

can only meet this objection by asserting that in the Eucharist the

remission of sins, which is effected in a general way by the preach-

ing of the Gospel, is personally imputed to each individual. His main

object is to uphold his contention that the Sacraments do not

sanctify ex opere operato, as taught by the Catholic Church.

Zwingli is equally arbitrary. It would be a most disagreeable task
to follow up this controversy in detail. Frequently one does not
even know to what extent both parties are sincere in their assertions, so much are their assertions involved in contradiction. Thus
Luther does not approve of the expression that Christ suffered for

us only in His human mature, for the reason that this might cast
doubt upon the doctrine of the two natures in Christ. Julius
Késtlin, the Protestant biographer of Luther, says that, as regards
the controversy about the Eucharist, one is “justified in asking
whether Luther really understood what he maintained; especially
whether he had a definite and clear idea of what we call the distinction between real and merely dynamic presence.” 52
The style in which this, the sublimest doctrine of the Christian

religion, is treated by the two leaders of the new theological systems

is anything but edifying. Ridicule, animosity, and misrepresentation
alternate with one another. Each is determined to remain master of the
situation and to capture the reader. How differently the same theme
is treated by the defenders of the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist,

as, for instance, the scholarly Bishop Fisher of Rochester in his Latin
treatise, ““On the Truth of the Real Presence” (Cologne, 1527).
Luther says that either his antagonists, above all Zwingli, or he himself
~ and his followers are servants of the devil; no other alternative exists. Satan,
he asserts, has crept into the Bible, which he (Luther) had once more

drawn from under the bench, and now produces rubbish and winks his
eyes, insinuating that Baptism, original sin, and Christ are of no conse52 Rostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, pp. 100 sq.

346

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

quence. Zwingli’s objections are dictated by a “‘desperate black devil” and
his interpretations of Luther’s words are “impudent lies.”

The leaders of the “Sacramentarians,” he declares, are not persuaded of
the truth of their cause; in fact they cannot be, but must sincerely regret
(as he undertakes to demonstrate) that they began the quarrel. But the devil

is determined to be victorious.

“Whoever is willing to be warned, let him beware of Zwingli and avoid
his books as he would the poison of the infernal Satan; for that fellow is
thoroughly perverse and has lost Christ completely.”
In discussing Zwingli’s objection to Christ’s being seated at the right hand
of God, he mockingly speaks of the cope which Christ must wear in Heaven,
and asks whether all creatures are not there simultaneously with Him, “such
as lice and fleas, that infest the monk’s cowl.” His opponent replies with
undignified acerbity that he is not in need of the phantasmagorical heaven of
Luther, nor does he want his cow! or dog’s hood; Luther should take them

home and deck himself out in them.
Such were the depths of triviality to which these controversialists descended. Nevertheless Zwingli assures his readers that he did not intend to
berate Luther with such “unrestrained language” as the latter employed to
insult him, but that he abstained from the use of such invectives as “fanatic,”
“devil,” “scoundrel,” *‘heretic,” “‘contumacious fellow,” “blockhead,” etc.
Indeed, his tone is more moderate in the beginning of his argument and somehow betrays the cultured humanist. Eventually, however, he repays Luther
in his own coin and uses an uncouth, Swiss-German dialect.

In the interests of decency, especially of religious decency, it was
well that Luther made no further reply after his “Great Profession,”

but left the matter where it was by saying that “it was not the
proper thing for him to concern himself any longer with the doltish

replies and idiotic performances of his opponents.” 53
§.

THE

PROTEST OF

1§29

At the diet of Spires, which convened in April, 1529, under the

presidency of Archduke Ferdinand, the Catholic estates of the Em-

pire and their theological advisers appeared to be more united and
determined than before. They were prepared to put an end to the

abuse to which the recess of the diet of 1526 had been put by the

innovators during the last three years. For the flexible phraseology
83 1bid., p.

102. Most of the passages cited above appear in K65tlin-K§werau,
op. cit.

THE PROTEST OF 1529

347

of the resolution, which had been forced from that assembly, was
unscrupulously exploited by the reformers to advance their cause.
Hence, the Catholic majority of the estates at the new diet in
Spires succeeded in having the following modification adopted and
published by authority of the Emperor:
Those who adhered to the edict of Worms “shall and are required to
abide by the same until a future council”; in the case of the other estates,
all further “innovations” should be prevented, at least until the assembly of
the council, where it is impossible to abolish the new doctrine without disturbance. In those parts where the new doctrine is upheld, preaching against
the Sacrament of the altar and placing obstacles to attendance at Mass were

specifically prohibited. Severe penalties were prescribed against the Anabaptists and others who incited the people to rebellion. It was finally de-

clared, in order to safeguard religious peace, that no estate was to “protect

the subjects and relatives of one ‘faith’ against the authorities of the other”;
that the public peace declared by the diet of Worms was to continue; and,
if any one estate be “violently overrun” by another, it was the duty of the
“Kammergericht” (supreme court of judicature) to intervene.

There was nothing in these decrees which the reformers could
reasonably have represented as unfair, had they sincerely wished to
live in peaceful concord and in a temporary arrangement until the
assembly of the council which they themselves had desired. But they
harbored no such desire; on the contrary, they were eager to advance
farther and resolved to make a solemn protest against the legitimate
recess of the imperial diet.

This protest was made on the nineteenth of April, 1529, and from
it the entire party which made it derived the name of “Protestants.”

However, not all the princely estates which were favorably inclined
either to religious reform or to Lutheranism, concurred in this
hazardous protest. The Elector John of Saxony and the Landgrave

Philip of Hesse took the lead. They were joined by Margrave George
of Brandenburg-Ansbach, Duke Ernest of Brunswick-Liineburg,

and Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt. Their following was considerably
increased when thirteen cities of Upper Germany, who were almost
exclusively in favor of Zwinglianism, joined their ranks. These cities
were Strasburg, Ulm, Constance, Lindau, Memmingen, Kempten,

Nérdlingen, Heilbronn, Reutlingen, Isny, St. Gall, Weissenburg, and

348

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

Windesheim. Nuremberg also went over to their side. On April 22,
Electoral Saxony, Hesse, and the cities of Strasburg, Nuremberg, and

Ulm secretly formed a defensive alliance.
Whilst the Eucharistic controversy completely

separated the
majority of the above-mentioned cities of Upper Germany from
the Lutheran faith, they nevertheless, in their inglorious procedure

against the authority and peace of the Empire, overlooked the religious
differences which prevailed in their own ranks and united against the
self-defense to which the Catholic Church was bound to resort.
The Protestants, moreover, frustrated the proposed movement
against the Turks. When the imperial diet convened, it was impressed in the name of the absent Emperor with the necessity of
energetically repelling the danger of a Turkish invasion, which was
declared to be the most important subject before the assembly. The report had reached Spires that the Turkish fleet was cruising along the
coast of Sicily, threatening the Occident. “It is an undeniable fact,”
says Wilhelm Walther, a Protestant authority, “that the [Protestant
estates] would not promise to render aid against the Turks, unless the
Catholic estates of the Empire arrived at some other conclusion concerning the religious question than that under discussion, which [ they
declared] it was impossible for them to accept.” 54
Luther was naturally very much in favor of the idea that the
parties who espoused the new religion should issue a protest against
the resolution of the imperial diet. Two things, however, worried
him, and Melanchthon even more: namely, the formation of an
armed alliance of his followers in opposition to the Emperor; and the
approximation to Zwinglianism, which, though so far merely exterior, might result in an intrinsic religious coalescence. Melanchthon

implored them not to break with Charles V, with Ferdinand, and
the “whole empire”; for thus far the Protestants had maintained
the semblance of not actually wishing to secede from the Empire,

nor even from the Church, but of desiring only a reform of
the
same. For Luther, Zwinglianism, which he detested, constituted the

chief source of anxiety. In his worry concerning the new alliance,
he wrote to the Elector of Saxony on May 22 that the impetuo
us
temperament of the Landgrave [Philip of Hesse] would create

in the Empire, that trust was to be placed in God, not in

havoc

man, but

worst of all was the fact that, by uniting with the Zwinglia

ns, the

54 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 383.

LUTHER AND ZWINGLI AT MARBURG

349

Lutherans would incur the sins of those who antagonized the Sacrament and were deliberate enemies of God.?® The Elector bowed to
his representations and desisted from further attempts to bring about
an alliance.

With increased energy Landgrave Philip, on the other hand, pursued his and Zwingl’s project of forming a close union of all the
adherents of the new religion in Germany and Switzerland, against
the Hapsburg power and against the Catholic Church. Before this

could be accomplished, however, it was necessary to effect some kind
of reconciliation between Luther and Philip. The latter was resolved

to go to impossible lengths, and it was decided that a personal conference should take place between Luther and Zwingli.
6. LUTHER AND ZWINGLI IN THE CASTLE OF MARBURG

On April 22, 1529, the Landgrave of Hesse proposed to his friend

Zwingli that he and Luther, as well as the principal representatives

of the two parties in the controversy concerning the Eucharist, hold
a theological disputation. It was not zeal for religion which induced
him to suggest this conference, but the desire of realizing his political
ambitions, which, in comformity with Zwingli, were directed against
the Emperor and the house of Hapsburg. The exiled Duke Ulric of

Wiirttemberg had won over the Landgrave to this hopeless idea of a
conference. The intrepid Zwingli favored it at once, without, however, holding out any hope of union on his part. When the matter
was broached to Luther, he at first expressed himself against it.
Melanchthon also had his scruples. The Elector John at that time
was not disposed to have anything to do with the Sacramentarians, as
he feared the designs of the Swiss. Eventually, however, the urgent
invitations of the Landgrave were crowned with success. On September 29, Zwingli and Oecolampadius, representing the Swiss, came to

Sturm
Marburg, as guests of Philip of Hesse. Bucer, Hedio, and Jacob
s
beside
;
Menius
and
ius,
represented Strasburg; Jonas, Cruciger, Mycon
Luther and Melanchthon, represented Wittenberg.
At the first meeting, which was held on October 1, Luther and

tively, in
Melanchthon engaged Oecolampadius and Zwingli, respecion
of the
private conferences. But, apart from the burning quest
ions
suspic of

Sacrament, the latter only succeeded in removing some
55 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. 11, p. 120,

350

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

the Wittenberg theologians against the doctrines of the Zurich reformer.
The second day witnessed a solemn public disputation between

Luther, on the one hand, and Zwingli and Oecolampadius on the
other. Luther had written on the table the words of institution in
large letters: “This is my Body.” In response to the sophistical arguments of his opponents, he always repeated, after expounding the contrary thesis, that he would not yield one tittle of these clear words.
Without yielding his position, Zwingli cordially demanded that they
come to a fraternal agreement.

After the conference had continued for three days, and a number
of futile meetings had been held, it was decided, upon motion of the
Landgrave, that at least a fraternal union, as desired by Zwingli,
should be established. But Luther refused to accept the hand that

was extended to him; for
to him the existing theological differences
about the Eucharist appeared prohibitive. When Zwingli pleaded
for Christian charity, Luther was prepared to grant the request,
provided it meant love of peace. He stuck to his oft-repeated declara-

tion: “You have a spirit which differs from ours,” perceiving and
fearing the frank rationalism of Zwingli, and believing it was this
spirit which induced Zwingli to regard the existing point of controversy as not so important as to become an obstacle to the union

of both parties, and that eventually it would induce him to abandon
all religion.
The Fifteen Articles of Marburg, personally composed by Luther, were to
constitute a bulwark against the danger of infidelity, which he secretly
feared.®® Contrary to his expectations, however, they were accepted by the

Swiss and Strasburg theologians. They expressed Luther’s position relative
to the Trinity, Christology, faith and justification, Baptism and private con-

fession. A further article, superscribed, “On the Sacrament of the Body and

Blood of Christ,” agrees with Zwingli in its negative aspect, namely, in its

opposition to Catholicism; for it repudiates the reception of the Eucharist
under one species and also the sacrifice of the Mass. This is followed by the

vague declaration that “the Sacrament is a Sacrament of the true body and
blood of Jesus Christ, and the spiritual reception of this same body and blood

is necessary for every Christian.” It states, furthermore, that “we all believe
58 “Marburger Gesprich und Marburger Artikel” Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, III, pp- 110
sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. LXV, pp. 88 sqq.
:

LUTHER AND ZWINGLI AT MARBURG

351

and maintain the custom of receiving the Sacrament, as it has been given and
ordained by the Word of God, the Almighty, that the delicate consciences
be thereby moved unto faith and love by the Holy Ghost.” Thereupon the
existing dissension relative to the doctrine of the Eucharist is expressly admitted and the necessity of charity (to a certain degree) is taught: “Although we have not at this time settled the question whether the true body
and blood of Christ are corporeally in the bread and wine, nevertheless,
Christian charity, to the extent that every one’s conscience can tolerate,
should be mutually manifested by both factions, who should diligently supIS)li'ca.lte Almighty God to confirm us in the right understanding through His
pirit.”

Thus the opponents separated, having settled nothing. In the practical field of the religious life the schism opened by the new theology
grew proportionately wider. Fortunately for Germany, one good

result came of this conference, namely, that the plan of an alliance
‘against the Emperor and the Empire, as fostered by Zwingli and the
Landgrave of Hesse, failed to materialize.

Although intimate union with the Swiss reformers was frustrated,
the Zwinglian doctrines continued to make progress in a portion
of Germany. In many parishes of the Swabian and Alemannic dis-

tricts, there arose a powerful Zwinglian faction. The Swiss doctrine and idea of the Church, combined with the denudation of altars, the destruction of sacred images, and certain political projects,
extended down the Rhine from Basle over Strasburg into the Netherlands.

’

In virtue of the attitude of Luther and his Elector, an alliance of
the Upper German Zwinglians with the Wittenberg reformers became impossible. Nuremberg on the whole followed Luther, whereas

Ulm expressly joined the so-called “Burgrecht” of Zurich. The result
was dissension everywhere.

Luther looked in vain for another bridge to span the chasm. He

caused the so-called Articles of Schwabach to be proposed to the
towns of Upper Germany.” These articles had been drawn up by

the theologians of Wittenberg in July or August, and were more

or less opposed to the Zwinglians. On the sixteenth of October they
were rejected by Strasburg and Ulm at a congress held in Schwabach
57 Weimar ed., Vol. XXX, III, pp. 86 sqd.; Erl. ed,, Vol. XXIV, 2nd ed., pp. 334sqq.sqq.

Cfr. H. v. Schubert in the Zeitschrift fir Kirchengeschichte, XXIX (1918), pp. 342

352

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

and likewise at a convention held at Schmalkalden on November 29.
Landgrave Philip, whom Luther regarded with suspicion, oscillated
between the two great factions of the new religion, whilst Zwingli
hoped, through the mediation of the Landgrave, “to isolate Wittenberg and thus finally to make it agreeable to his plans.” 58
7.

PERSONAL

EXPERIENCES.

TEMPTATIONS

On his return to Wittenberg from the Marburg Conference, Luther,
as he states in a letter to Link, was seized with grave spiritual afflictions
and temptations at Torgau.5® It is possible that the excitement experienced at Marburg and the sermons he preached on his homeward
journey may have contributed to this state of soul. While he boasted

of his victory over Zwingli, he fully and painfully realized the latter’s
obstinacy and the dangers that threatened his own doctrine. In addition, terrible accounts of Turkish aggressions tormented him. His

heart, which once before, at Wittenberg, had caused him trouble, again
became affected. He wrote to Link that he was scarcely able to reach

Wittenberg, since Satan’s angel had tormented him so that he de-

spaired of being able to return to his own.

At Wittenberg his suffering continued. Whilst blaming the Turks

to a great extent for his condition, he complained to his friend

Amsdorf that they (the Turks) had been sent by God to chastise
the blasphemous enemies of the gospel and to punish the people
for their intolerable ingratitude towards him. He said he sensed their
fury in the struggles of his soul, but with the aid of Christ hoped to

overcome their god, the devil.®® Only gradually a period of relative
quiet assuaged him.

Previously, in July, 1527, Luther had survived an attack which

had brought him to the verge of death. At that time his mental
sufferings and self-reproaches were preceded and accompanied by
fainting spells. Bugenhagen, who attended him and also heard his
confession, wrote at the time that Luther’s internal sufferings were

comparable to the spiritual darkness “which is often mentioned in the
descriptions of the infernal torments of the soul that occur in the
Psalms”; they were more severe and dangerous than the mortal weak58 G. Kawerau, Reformation und Gegenreformation, 3rd
ed., p. 104.
59 Letter of October 28, 1529, from Wittenberg; Bricfwechse
l, VII, pp.
80 On October 19; ibid., p. 173.

179 sq.

PERSONAL EXPERIENCES. TEMPTATIONS

353

ness of the body. He adds that Luther had “been through a number
of such attacks,” although they were not all so severe. Luther him-

self at the time said to his confidant Jonas, that those who observed
his exterior conduct were of the opinion that “he lay on a bed of
roses, though God knew how it stood with him.” €1
In the language of Luther and his friends, those painful conditions

are termed spiritual temptations (fentationes spirituales). We learn

more about their nature by his frank epistolary communications

during this period of severe internal struggles, through which he passed
at the close of the year 1529, after a temporary surcease in July.
These communications contain a vivid delineation of his despondent
mood and his theological fears—they are the most melancholy chords
of his entire life.

Undoubtedly his bitter experiences in connection with the visitation

of Electoral Saxony, the irritating discussions between himself and
Zwingli, the negotiations caused by the alleged papal conspiracy
discovered by Pack, the dangerously arbitrary conduct of Philip
of Hesse, the latter’s violation of the public peace and his hostilities
against Bamberg, Wiirzburg, and Mayence, were contributory causes.

Above all, the pathological condition of his nerves and his irregular

heart-action must be taken into consideration. When he was at-

tacked by spells of weakness and fear, his physical infirmities would
combine with the spiritual unrest caused by his reformatory efforts.
ed
His fears centered around such questions as: Why have you disturb
How
just?
is
cause
your
that
the peace of the Church? Are you sure
will you account for the ruin of so many souls? The bright memories
of his monastic days and of the happy hours he had spent within the

did
Catholic Church simply would not subside. His fears, therefore, frewere
they
least
at
not originate solely in his physical ailments;
proquently present without any concomitant sense of illness, as hephysimy
as
far
“as
tested at times when they were most violent, that
cal condition is concerned, I find myself tolerably well”; or, “I feel
well in body.”
Melanchthon
“For more than the whole of last week,” he writes tohell,
so that I
on August 2, 1527, “I was tossed about in death and

Billows and
still tremble all over my body and am exhausted.
tempests of despair and blasphemry assailed me, and T had lost Christ
almost completely.”

81 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 333 sqq.

354

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

He complains to his friends that he is suffering from the buffetings of the
prince of this world, the devil, who would be avenged on him; that reason
cannot comprehend how difficult it is to know that Christ is our justice;

and that “he seeks or thirsts after naught else than 2 merciful God.” Consequently, he had not yet found Him with an abiding certitude, notwithstanding the fact that when he apostatized, he based his entire doctrine and fight
against the Church and the pope.upon this supposed discovery.

“I am well in body; but as to how it stands with me in spirit I am not certain. . . . I seek only for a gracious Christ. . . . Satan wants to prevent

me from writing [in behalf of the gospel], and to drag me down with him
to hell. May Christ tread him under foot. Amen!”
“My Katie is strong in faith,” he wrote at that time; but of himself he is
constrained to say: “I am scarcely able to breathe because of tempests and

despondency.” He laments that pope and Emperor, princes and bishops,
nay, the whole world assail him, including “Erasmus and the Sacramentarians.” His very brethren torment him. In the words of St. Paul, he cries

aloud: “Combats without, fears within”

(2 Cor. VII, 5). By citing his

favorite Biblical passages, he endeavored to fortify himself in his own doc-

trine; but he felt that the “prince of demons,” who had risen against him,

was “‘armed to the teeth with Biblical quotations, so that his own knowledge

of Sacred Scripture vanished before him.”

With foolhardy temerity he nevertheless forces the habitual notions of

his own upon his conscience, lest he perish. “Christ, indeed, has become

weak”

(in him); nevertheless, he would “believe with firmness (fortiter
credo) that his work was pleasing to the Lord.”

What oppressed him most is the thought that Satan alone is

active in the attacks upon his conscience; that he (Satan) assumes
the form of Christ and decks himself out as an angel of light. Is it
not probable that all his spasmodic imaginings of Satan concealed
from him the just reproaches with which he accused himself? To

him the voice of his conscience is the voice of Satan.

But this is not the place to penetrate more deeply into Luther’s
dismal mental struggles during those months. It was the most tem-

pestuous period through which he had to pass. It approached its close

at the beginning of 1528, but there were painful after-effects.
“Blessed be my Christ,” he says amid a sight of relief, “blessed in the
midst of despair, death, and blasphemy. . . . It is my glory to have
lived in the world in conformity with the will of Christ, forgetting
the very wicked life of the past.” The story of his sufferings reveals
the extent to which an impetuous will is capable of torturing the

35§

PERSONAL EXPERIENCES. TEMPTATIONS

soul. Scarcely another man ever commanded such titanic forces as
did Luther in his interior and exterior struggles.
An echo of his internal experiences is his famous hymn, “Ein’
feste Burg” (A safe stronghold our God is still), which he composed
in those days and which is still widely sung by his admirers, but
properly understood only by a few. In its ponderous verses, expressive
of the ardor of the battle which he at that time waged against the

pope and the devil, against the “ancient evil one,” he clung to the
Christ of his Gospel: “But for us fights the proper Man, whom God
Himself hath bidden. . . . And were this world all devils o'er . . .
they cannot overpower us.” %2

Towards the end of January, 1528, he declared to a confidant quite

in his own fashion, relative to the Sacramentarians who annoyed him,
that he was determined, in order to get rid of his fears still more
effectively, “still further to provoke Satan, who was raging against
him with the utmost fury.”

In the middle of the same year he told another friend that it is

always necessary, when temptations assail one, to exert oneself to the
utmost against the devil, who is plainly to be discerned; and that
“jt is imperative to achieve salvation by blindly assuming as certain
that all thoughts to the contrary are mere devil’s treason.” ¢
From time to time, nevertheless, his writings and addresses reécho

his lamentation of a “struggling conscience.” He hears how the devil
speaks through man: “It will not be easy for you to die.” Yet, as
time went on, his mental gymnastics increasingly overcame the reproaches of reason and conscience, aided by the distractions of his
polemical life, the delirium of his successes, and the intoxicating
eulogy of his friends.®®

in
His courage found a more worthy cause to display itself when,
broke
,
(Pest)
e
plagu
the
as
mid-summer, a lingering disease, described
was
out in Wittenberg and the rest of Germany. The university
Bugen
and
r
Luthe
temporarily removed to Jena; many fled, but

ual consolation
hagen, the local pastor, remained to administer spirit
to the sick and the dying. The contagion also entered the former
549 sq., for the full text, and also Grisar,
62 See Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp.studien
, 1922, D. 4), PP- 145qQ.

Trutzlied “Ein’ feste Burg” (Luther

y 27, 1528

83 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 338. Letter to John Hess in Breslau, Januar

(Briefwechsel, V1, p. 199.)

64 Ibid., pp. 338 sq.
85 1pid., cfr. pp. 356 5qq.

Luthers

356

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

monastery which was now his home. But he was not concerned
about his own life. “Christ is here,” he wrote to Spalatin, “so that we
may not be alone; and He will be victorious.” 8¢ At that time he

composed the little treatise, “Whether one May Flee from Death,” ¢

intended to inspire courage. Pastors and preachers, such is his exhortation, ought to remain ‘at their post, especially in such dire
trouble, when the flock is more than ever in need of spiritual help.

Luther exhibited the same courage during the epidemic of the socalled “English sweat,” a fever which broke out in Wittenberg and
other cities in 1529. Again, in 1538 and 1539, he braved new outbreaks of the plague at Wittenberg, regarding perseverance as a duty
imposed upon him by his office, which was watched by many with dis-

trust. “God usually protects the ministers of His Word,” he writes in

1538, “if one does not run'in and out of the inns and lie in bed.”

8

Although many demands were made upon him, he willingly succored the suffering and the poor, aiding them as generously
as his

circumstances permitted. Thus he was able to say in a sermon
to

the people of Wittenberg that “he himself was poor, but the joy
with which he utilized what had been given to him to satisfy
his
needs exceeded that with which the wealthy among them enjoyed
their accumulated riches.” At the same time he censured the avarice
which he detected at Wittenberg. It was a theme to which he often

reverted. He was not accustomed to seek comfort in
the pleasures

of the table. He loved simplicity in his domestic life no less
than in
his manners, conversation, and intercourse with men. In this
respect
he wished to be an example to those who were associat
ed with him

in his work. When not afflicted with melancholy, his familiar
ity and
cordiality were a source of refreshment to his friends.
He gladly dis-

played his characteristic humor, occasionally even in dark
hours, in
order to distract his mind. He speaks of this as
a motive of his

jovial talks.®®

It is not true that the scene of his conviviality

'

was a tavern where

he was wont to consort of an evening with his friends
and pupils.
The account in question is a fabrication. As a matter
of fact Luther
spent his evenings with his family, in the one-ti
me monastery where,
88 On August 19, 1527 (Briefwechsel, VI,
p. 76.)

87 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1V, p. 272.
88 1bid., pp. 272 sq.

6® Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 306 sqq.

357

PERSONAL EXPERIENCES. TEMPTATIONS

with Catherine von Bora, he was usually surrounded by those who

were associated with him in his work, pupils or newcomers.TM

Nor is it true that he drank to excess.”* The so-called fanatics, the
Anabaptists, who were often strict in outward appearance, as well
as misinformed Catholic opponents, propagated unconfirmed rumors
to this effect. Some controversial writers discovered a pretext for
these accusations in certain misunderstood utterances of his. But
these critics overlooked the fact that their charges were based upon
jocose speeches or innocent quips by a man who was not always
cautious in his utterances. It is nowhere credibly reported that

Luther was drunk, even though there is evidence to show that he
imbibed rather freely, according to the prevailing German custom.

He was not exactly a model of abstemiousness, but he severely censured the excesses of princes and courtiers. In theory he was un-

doubtedly too compliant when he permitted a “good drink” (which
in those days meant a considerable quantity) in cases of depression
of spirit due to evil reports, worries, and heavy thoughts in general,
oppression owing to troubles and labor, temptations of the “devil”

ssness
resulting from sorrow and despondency. In his opinion, sleeple‘“‘good
and spiritual exhaustion alone were sufficient to justify a

drink.” 72

ts his
Mathesius, his pupil and eulogist, who was in many respec
his “wedding
mouthpiece, is even more indulgent. He says in one ofpatien
ce” with
of
t
amoun
n
certai
“a
have
sermons” that one must
tipsy”
little
a
“get
,
reason
valid
quite
those who sometimes, for a
or “kick over the traces.” TM

beer in an
If Luther had been addicted to the use of wine and his
marvel-

develop
excessive manner, he would not have been able toand
pamphlets filled
books
write
ous energy. A drunkard does not
facility with
and
ease
the
with
ideas
with serious and thought-provoking
indecorous
and
nt
viole
the
which Luther composed his writings. Even
saturated
not
are
life
his
d of
controversial tracts of the later perio
endeavtly
recen
has
ica
with alcohol, as a Protestant writer in Amer
d
nal
infer
an
of
spirit
ored to demonstrate; but they evince theThe so-called “drunkenhatre
docwhich is to be adjudged pathological.
70 H, Grisar, "Ein unterschobener Bericht,” etc., in Ebrengabe fiir Herzog

von Sachsen, 1920, pp. 693—703.

71 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 294~-318.
72 [bid., p. 312.
78 1bid., p. 310.

Johann Georg

358

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 15251530

tor” (doctor plenus) must be obliterated from history. In passing
it should be remarked that this description of himself, which was
said to have been found in one of his letters, is based upon an incorrect

reading.”*

_

The existence of natural children of Luther, with which ignorant
polemicists of a former age frequently concerned themselves, is also
unhistorical. Erasmus says in one of his letters that Catherine von

Bora was confined a fortnight after her marriage with Luther. Subsequently he retracted this false rumor.” An alleged illegitimate child,

called Andrew, born at a later date, proved to be Luther’s nephew,
Andrew Kaufmann. The maid servant in Luther’s home, Rosina
Truchsess, turned out to be an immoral woman, but there was not
the least excuse for the gossip that Luther had sexual intercourse
with her prior to his dismissing her in a fit of anger. The adulter
infans (adulterine child) discovered in the controversial writings
of Aurifaber (1569) is merely a printer’s error for alter infans
(the
other child), as correctly printed in the edition of 1568.76
History records that five children were born of Luther’s

union with

Catherine von Bora: Hans, born June 7, 1526; Magdale
n, born in
1529; Martin, born in 1531; Paul, born in

born in 1534.

1533; and Margaret,

In mid-summer, 1525, Luther secretly sheltered among
his guests
in the Black Monastery, his former friend and Witten
berg associate,
Andrew Karlstadt, who had become his bitter
enemy. This was a

pleasant trait of his character. After the unfort
unate issue of the

Peasants’ War, in which Karlstadt was accuse
in virtue of his sermons in Rothenburg ob

d of having participated
der Tauber, he lacked the

necessities of life and now solicited Luther
’s aid at any price, pre-

pared to suffer any kind of humiliation.
He was willing to keep

silence with regard to his own special doctri
nes and to work for
a living, provided he was permitted to return
to the Electorate of
Saxony. Luther was prepared to intercede
for him with his sovereign.
Karlstadt came to visit him and secretly spent
several weeks in the
former monastery. For a time not even Cather
ine was aware of
" H. Grisar in Histor. Jabrbuch, XXXIX

PpP. 316 sq.

78 Grisar, Luther, Vol, II, pp. 187 sq.
76 Op. cit., Vol. 111, pp. 280 sq.

(1919=20), pp. 496-500; cfr. Luther, Vol.
‘

III,

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

359

his presence. Only Luther’s servant Wolf Sieberger had been initiated
into the secret and daily brought food to Karlstadt. After Luther
had obtained from him a forced declaration concerning his teaching
on the Last Supper, he interceded with the Elector John, who gave
Karlstadt permission to remain in his Electorate.””
After residing at various places, Karlstadt betook himself to
Kemberg, where he labored as a peasant and kept a small shop. Luther
published several new tracts against this backslider; whereupon he
evaded arrest in October, 1529, by fleeing from the Electorate of
Saxony to Holstein, where he joined the Anabaptist Melchior Hoffmann, with whom he went to East Frisia. This vacillating man is
next found in Strasburg, then in Zurich with Zwingli, and finally
in Basle, where he joined the Zwinglians as a teacher in the theological
faculty, though still persevering in his peculiar opinions, and completely at outs with Luther.
8. CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

The attack on the ancient Church summoned to her defense a
great host of writers, among whom were many illustrious minds.

The number of theologians, preachers, secular and regular clerics, and
Jaymen who wielded the pen in defense of the Church is surprisingly
great. Naturally not all their writings are valuable. The products
of the trained theologians transcend the works of mere preachers

or occasional writers. Many of these productions bear the stamp of
haste, the ephemeral polemics of the day, and the heat of battle; but
not a few possess permanent scientific and historical interest.
Unfortunately, it is a fact that this literature has not been sufficiently noted, or at least not properly esteemed in its ensemble,TM

though, on the other hand, it labored too much under the influence
of contention and lacked unity and organization in its development.
Even to-day, it is often hardly possible to discover the most telling
achievements. The odiousness, moreover, with which the Protestant

partisans criticized these writings, lay as a heavy weight upon them.
In consequence of the disparagement with which these Catholic
authors were treated by the victoriously advancing reform moveof this
77 Ibid., Vol. 111, p. 388. Barge, Karlstadt, Vol. II, pp. 369 sqq., treats extensively
.
78 In G. Wolfs Quellenkunde der deutschen Reformationsgeschichte (11, ii, 1922, pp. 206

incident and the sequel.

5qq.) the seventh section: “Die katholischen Gegner,” is unduly abbreviated.

360

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

ment, it became customary to detect in them impotence of language
as contrasted with the fiery eloquence of a Luther, or intellectual
poverty in comparison with the bright flashes of his wit. It is true that
the recklessness of Luther’s language, by which he enthused the masses,

was lacking in the replies of those who defended the Catholic Church.
They do not possess the tempestuous force of the Wittenberg reformer. In that tempest Luther alone was endowed with an epochal
linguistic talent far outdistancing in this respect even his own followers.

In recent times 2 more appreciative estimate of the Catholic apologists of the Reformation period has gained ground. The general
progress of objective historical research has contributed to this, as
well as numerous special studies, such as those of the scholarly Dr.
Nicholas Paulus. It has been aided particularly by the labors embodied in the monumental Corpus Catholicorum, a collection of re-

prints intended to unite all those old publications in a critical edition.
A more diligent study of these writings has revealed various excellences possessed by many of the apologists of the old theology and
the rights of the Church. Versatility and brilliancy preponderate in
a surprising degree in the works of Jerome Emser, secretary to Duke
George of Saxony. Extensive reading and circumspection dominate
the writings of the cathedral canon, John Cochlaeus. Sincerity, directness, and acumen characterize John Eck, the professor of theology.
Dignity, nay, even a certain solemnity, are the marks of John Faber,

bishop of Vienna. Ingenious, though occasionally unrefined, humor is
discoverable in the writings of Thomas Murner, the popular Franciscan. Theological and religious austerity characterize the works of
the Dominican Jacob von Hochstraten. Erasmus, who originally
inclined towards Luther, in his subsequent controversial writings
shows great intellectual power and abounds in satire. These seven men
form a constellation of polemical writers around whom many other
able and distinguished defenders of the Church grouped themselves.
It was no easy resolve, but rather a certain risk for these men to
rise in opposition to the powerful Luther, or to resist the religious
revolt in general. These writers could expect no appreciation at the
hands of their opponents, but only derision and contempt.

This was pa.rticularly the case when Luther took notice of them. He

loaded them wiih opprobrium and often horribly distorted their teachings,

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

361

“I. despise the opposition,” he says, “and regard them as downright fools.”
H13. adherents imitated his tactics.” In the event that an opponent of his
achieved prominence, he was liable to be depicted as a beast in the cartoons
and pamphlets of the opposition. Thus Emser was represented as a goat,
C.ochlaeus as an ass and a snail, Murner as a cat, Lemp as a dog. Luther and
his supporters accused the apologists of the Church that deep down in their
hearts they were convinced of the untruth of their own writings and the justice of his cause; that they wrote as they did because they were friends of

the papacy or expected a liberal reward. If these accusations failed to dissuade

a courageous writer from his undertaking, he encountered difficulties in procuring a publisher for his writings, as is evidenced, for example, by the case
of Cochlaeus, who made indefatigable efforts to maintain at least two efficient

Catholic printing presses. The reformed or religiously indifferent publishers
literally flooded the market. What they were after was profit. Their produc-

tion brought a good return in money, whereas Catholic books and pamphlets
were not acceptable to the colporteurs who traveled through the country
selling popular literature. Royalties as a rule were paid by neither party. The

Catholic apologists were confronted with the additional disadvantage of in-

sufficient material support on the part of the bishops, who were mostly remiss in this respect, and by the absence of any stimulus for the work that
was so urgently needed.

If, despite these hindrances, a noteworthy and timely literature
was provided in defense of the Church, this fact was due to disinter-

ested zeal for the cause. Timely above all else were the recommendations made by Catholic writers for a reform of the internal conditions of the Church. Correctly sensing the need of the age, many
popular writers, whilst combating the new evangelical liberties, endeavored at the same time to bring about a genuine reform of the
morals of clergy and laity. In reply to the criticisms of their opponents, they unhesitatingly acknowledged the prevalence of abuses in
the Church. In many instances, effective notice of these evils was

taken only as a result of public criticism. Thus many Catholics ad-

mitted that Lutheranism furnished the occasion for perfecting cate-

chetical instruction. For this reason the apologists of the time also exposed without fear or favor the moral decadence which everywhere
accompanied the religious revolt. In forceful language they demon-

strated the fatal social consequences of the new gospel, especially on
the occasion of the Peasants’ War.
The defenders of the Church were benefited by the labors of the
79 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 172.

362

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

theologians, which were often truly profound. They illustrated topics
which had hitherto been but inadequately treated, such as the Church
and her authority, the papacy as the center of unity, etc. The greatest services in this regard were rendered by Cajetan de Vio. Other
Italians, such as Catharinus, as well as Germans, Frenchmen, and
Englishmen, followed his example. The foundations were laid for the
development of the theology of the Council of Trent and of the flourishing post-Tridentine period iz re justification and grace. The apologists also discussed Biblical questions more freely than before. This
change of tactics was necessitated by the Lutheran principle that the
Bible was the sole source of faith, and by the popularity of Luther’s

German translation of the Bible. As a consequence, several new trans-

lations were made, such as those of Emser, Dietenberger and Dr. Eck.
Luther himself declared: “I have driven them to the Bible.” 8
In general, the tone and style of these Catholic controversial writings is moderate and convincing, free from the excesses of the opposition. Not as though the indignation of the Catholic apologists did not
occasionally flare forth in their writings, as when, e.g., they saw how

ecclesiastical institutions and doctrines, with which they had been
acquainted since their youth, were subjected to monstrous distortion.
In their replies, however, they did not employ the rude style of
Luther, not even when, for instance, they, as cloistered religious, defended their state of life against his vile book “On Monastic Vows,”

or when, as priests, they undertook to defend the most sacred thing in
their religion, the holy sacrifice of the Mass, against scandalous defamation.

Many are strikingly calm and conciliatory in their writings. This is

true, especially at the beginning of the controversy, of certain Franciscans who had been well educated in the humanities. John Findling,
whose Hellenized name was Apobolymaeus, in 1521 published a
“Warning” to Luther, in which he addresses him as “dearest friend”
and refuses to characterize him as a heretic, although the papal condemnation had already been issued. He challenges Luther’s divine
mission because of his unheard-of and hostile revolt—of course without any prospect of influencing the reformer.8! Such works were in-

spired by the laudable intention of not wishing to aggravate matters,
and also by a certain narrowness of view. The basic sentiment under80 Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, pp. 432 sqq.
81 Ibid., Vol. 11, pp. 171 sq.

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

363

lying Humanism, which was very pronounced among the learned and
which particularly animated Erasmus, proved to be harmful.
Other apologists move more freely, for instance, the accomplished,
energetic Franciscan Caspar Schatzgeyer, a model of moderation com-

bined with correctness and vigor. He was the most prominent defender
of monastic life in southern Germany. At the time of his death,
which occurred in Munich, in 1527, he had composed more than
twenty works, most of which are excellent.

One of the grievances against Luther which pervades the works of
the Catholic apologists is his obstinate mendacity. They style him a
father of falsehood and a gross calumniator, sustaining this severe
indictment by many facts. Nearly all of them hold that the ex-monk

of Wittenberg is completely under the dominance of the devil, the
father of lies. Some of the most daring among them, in speaking of
the demoniacal traits in Luther’s character, insinuate that his is a
case of diabolical possession. It was their persistent belief that his obstinacy and uncanny dexterity in inventing constantly new attacks
could not be explained except on the assumption that he was in league

with Satan. John Dietenberger, a learned Dominican, author of a
catechism and other works, calls Luther “the devil’s hired messenger”
and says that “here everything reeks of devils; nothing that the
devilish man writes can stand without the devil, who endevils all his
products.” 82 The erudite and moderate Willibald Pirkheimer of
Nuremberg writes in a letter, in 1529: “Luther seems to have gone

quite mad, or to be agitated by some wicked demon.” Elsewhere this
author cites more than a dozen passages from varied contemporary
writings, which speak of a diabolic activity on the part of Luther.®®
Luther himself gave occasion to the formation of such charges, among
other actions by such unintelligible performances as his alleged disputation with the devil concerning the Mass. The general propensity
of the time to discover a special intervention of Satan in extraor-

dinary phenomena undoubtedly contributed to the formation of the
afore-mentioned accusations. Cochlaeus traces them to certain idiosyncrasies of Luther shown when he was a young friar.

‘

Elsewhere—first of all, so far as we know, in the writings of the
former Dominican, Peter Sylvius (who was, by the way a very ordinary writer) —this contention of Satanic intervention is expanded into
82 1bid., Vol. IV, p. 355.
88 1bid., p. 353

364

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

the fiction, founded on fabulous narratives, that the devil himself
had begot Luther. This senseless babble was propagated by other
writers.3* In general, distortions caused by the readily accepted false
legends about Luther, crept into the writings of lesser, nay, at times,
even of major authors. One of the most common of them concerns
his alleged drunkenness. This story plays its part both at home and
abroad. Thus, in Italy, the Dominican theologian Catharinus expatiates at length on the inebriety of the religious reformer of the

North. Other authors, in view of the uncertain rumors which were
spread by the Anabaptists and other fanatics, write more objectively. The learned Cardinal Cajetan, for instance, prefers to clarify

the questions at issue, without attacking the person or character of
his opponent, with whom he had become sufficiently acquainted at
Augsburg.
.
Only a few of those who discuss Luther’s character intimate that he
was abnormal in thought and sentiment. His nervous malady and its

influence upon his mental life were naturally hidden to the controversialists. Men at that time were not interested in such observations.
The keenly penetrating mind of Erasmus, who was kept informed
by humanistic acquaintances of Luther, was ahead of his contempo-

raries in this respect. In his controversial works, “Hyperaspistes”
(1526) and “Purgatio” (1534), and also in his letters, he calls at-

tention to this aspect of Luther’s nature,®® though in his unrefined lan-

guage he at times goes too far. He states that Luther is mentally deranged in various ways, imputes mental and emotional aberrations to

him (insanus, lymphaticus, non sobrius, febricitans, temulentus, sine
mente, delirus, etc.). On one occasion he appraises him as follows: “In

writing thus, Luther, abandoned by the spirit, he is not himself active,
but there is active within him another spirit with his diatribes.” 86

Pirkheimer would not offer an opinion as to whether Luther was “demented or actuated by an evil demon.” As early as 1524 John Clich-

tovaeus describes the mental state of the ex-monk as “drunkenness

or demoniacal possession.” In 1522, the gentle Schatzgeyer is impelled
to use almost similar terms. The phenomenon was inexplicable to him
84 Ibid., pp. 356, 358.
85 Ibid., p. 353.
86 1bid.: *'Quis non videt, haec sine mente scribi, nec agere
Lutherum, quum haec scribit,
sed agi spiritu quodam maledicentiae?”

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

365

and therefore the admixture of falsehoods and exaggerations in the

delineation of Luther’s character is excusable.

The Catholics but rarely employed cartoons in combating Luther.
Their efforts in this direction are lacking in those captivating and
mordant elements which Luther did not shrink from applying in his
polemical cartoons. These are very vulgar in many respects, and it is
evident that the Catholic controversialists preferred to avoid such in-

decencies on moral grounds. But they also lacked experienced artists
of the kind the reformers had in the person of Luther’s friend, Lucas
Cranach, and others who espoused their cause. Thus, while the wellknown effigy of Lutherus septiceps (the seven-headed Luther) by
John Cochlaeus is based upon a sound idea, viz., to illustrate in
graphic fashion the contradictions of Luther and his vacillating at-

titudes, the artistic representation is very defective and illustrates the

impossibility of tolerably representing a human being with seven heads.
In a rapid review of the most prominent protagonists and defenders of the Catholic cause up to about 1520, the names of Eck, Coch-

laeus, and Faber must occupy a prominent place.

Dr. John Eck was such a prolific writer that he wrote thirteen
short treatises on. the religious questions of the day in 1518 and 1519.
He combated not only the doctrines of Luther, but subsequently also
those of Zwingli. On sundry journeys to Rome he acted as adviser

to the popes. As professor of theology at Ingolstadt he founded there
2 veritable centre for the preservation of the faith. His incessant and
prolific literary activity was interrupted only by his pastoral labors. He
also achieved distinction as a powerful preacher. After his victory in
the disputation at Leipsic, he celebrated a great triumph in 1526 at

ic
Baden (Switzerland) when he triumphantly defended the Cathol
With
ians.
Zwingl
teaching on the Eucharist in a disputation with the
ne of papal
a genuine mastery of the subject, he expounded the doctri
1520. In
in
red
primacy in the first of his major works, which appea
2 second treatise, published in 1522, Dr. Eck set forth the Catholic

g points
practice of penance and confession. He discussed other leadin
), on
(1523
of the religious controversy in his writings on Purgatory
In

(1527).
the Sacrifice of the Mass (1526), and on the monastic vows
Gospels,
the
of
tion
exposi
his
of
ation
public
1530-1531 he began the
originally in three parts, a work which achieved great practical results.

366

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

The most widely spread of his writings was his excellent and practical “Enchiridion against the Lutherans,” a handy synopsis of all the
questions at issue, with a concise refutation of errors, accompanied by
citations from the Bible, the Church councils, and the Fathers. It was
an armory (armamentarium, as he himself calls it) against the heretics. No one combined such indefatigable activity with such practical

insight and such a forceful style as this Bavarian scholar, whom

Luther feared and endeavored to ridicule by applying to him epithets like Dr. Geck (German for coxcomb) and Dr. Saueck (German for sow’s comber) .87
John Cochlaeus, small of stature, but very active—styled the “puppet” in Luther’s circle—was a native of Wendelstein near Schwabach
(whence the name Cochlaeus). As a humanist he had composed some
serviceable text-books.®® While still a dean at the cathedral of Our
Lady at Frankfort on the Main, he was undecided what attitude to
take toward Luther, but after 1520 openly opposed him. In 1526 he
went to Mayence as a canon of Archbishop Albrecht. Upon the

demise of Jerome Emser, in 1528, he obtained the influential position

of secretary to Duke George at the court of Dresden, which he held
until the latter’s death, in 1539. The writings of this industrious and

self-sacrificing man number 202 distinct titles. They are noted for
their extensive learning and ready wit and, after the death of Eck,
advanced him to first place among the defenders of the ancient faith.

They are less conspicuous for theological depth. Luther made but one
reply to Cochlaeus, whose criticism proved very annoying to him,
and then chose to observe silence. The work to which Luther replied
was the first published by Cochlaeus. It bore the title, “De Gratia
Sacramentorum,” and appeared in 1522.%% Other products of his pen
appeared in rapid succession, among them one in which the
author,

inspired by patriotic motives, deplores the condition of
Germany
caused by the religious controversy. His “Seven-headed Luther”
bore
the sub-title: “Luther everywhere in contradiction with
himself,”
and was published in Latin and German; it decisively influen
ced many
of those who still floundered in doubt.®°

John Faber, a native of Leutkirch in the Allgiu, was frequen

tly

87 Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, Index s. v. “Eck.”

88 Ibid., 5. v. “Cochlaeus.”

89 Luther’s Reply was entitled: Adversus Armatum
Virum Cochlaeum.
90 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 380 $qq.

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

367

mistaken for the Dominican writer John Faber of Heilbronn and
for John Faber of Augsburg. He was a secular priest and originally
assumed an attitude towards the religious innovation which resembled
that of Erasmus. Subsequently, however, he initiated a great movement against Lutheranism by his work “Against Certain New Doctrines of Martin Luther” (1522) and his “Hammer against the Lutheran Heresy,” which appeared in 1524. He, too, occupied himself,
and that most effectively, with the contradictions in Luther’s writings,
to which he devoted his “Antilogies” of 1530. In the interim he composed other works on the burning questions of the day. As vicargeneral of the bishop of Constance, Faber participated with his friend

Eck in the religious conference against Zwinglianism which was held
in Baden in 1§26. In 1527, Archduke Ferdinand sent him on important politico-ecclesiastical missions to Spain and England. In 1528
this prince recalled him to Vienna, where he was to raise the religious

consciousness of the university and to oppose the spread of Lutheranism in Austria. In 1§30, at the urgent request of Clement VII, he
took over the vacant episcopal see of Vienna.*!

The Dominican John Faber, incidentally mentioned above, was

surnamed “Augustanus” (a native of Augsburg), because Augsburg
was his native city and for many years the scene of his activities. He
was an erudite scholar whose mentality closely resembled that of
Erasmus. Towards the close of the year 1520 he wrote a pamphlet
(“Ratschlag”) in which he judged Luther far too favorably. After
the appearance of the latter’s book on the “Babylonian Captivity,”
he decidedly changed his views, severed his connection with the Humanist party, and combated the new theology in his sermons at Augsburg so courageously that he was driven out of the city in 1525. He
died abroad in 1530, a victim of his incessant labors.%?
Faber of Augsburg had been vicar-general of the Dominican Con-

gregation of Upper Germany, which had seceded from the more
numerous body of “Observantines” of the same Order, who were
subject to the jurisdiction of separate provincials. This Congregation of the Dominicans flourished side by side with the Saxon and
Upper German provinces of the same Order. All three of these great
91 Concerning Bishop John Faber, see Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, Index, s. v.

92 Cfr. N. Paulus, Die deutschen Dominikaner im Kampfe gegen Luther, p. 292. This
substantial and careful monograph also provides more particular information relative to
the following defenders of the faith.

368

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

bodies produced many learned and enthusiastic defenders of the
Catholic religion. The Order of St. Dominic, who had made the de-

fense of the faith a special object of his foundation, shared with the
Franciscans the leadership in the contest against Luther.
In the Saxon province of the Dominicans, two men achieved distinction by raising their voices against the Lutheran innovation.
They were: John Mensing, a versatile theologian and author, preacher
at Magdeburg and Dessau, afterwards preacher and professor at
Frankfort on the Oder, and finally auxiliary bishop of Halberstadt;
and Peter Rauch, likewise an able protagonist of Catholicism in the
pulpit and by means of his pen, who died as auxiliary bishop of Bamberg.
The Upper German province of the Dominican Order, on its part,
was proud of Jacob Hochstraten of Brabant, professor, prior, and

inquisitor at Cologne. His first work against Luther, entitled, “Con-

versations with St. Augustine,” which appeared in 1521-22, demonstrated that, in virtue of his Scholastic training, he had a more correct and penetrating insight into the errors of Luther than many

other contemporary Catholic scholars. His “Conversations” at the
same time reveal a comprehensive knowledge of the writings of St.

Augustine, the Doctor of the Church, whose utterances he contrasts

with the teachings of Luther. The “Conversations” were followed by

treatises on the veneration of the saints, Purgatory, Christian liberty,
and, finally, on justification and good works. They were composed
in a style which at times lacked due moderation. When Hochstraten
died, in 1527, the hatred of his enemies pursued him. They charged
that he had died amid tortures of conscience, having realized that he
had defended error—a calumny which was meted out to a large number of Catholic apologists.
Conrad Kollin, a member of the same province, was a professor
at Cologne, celebrated for his knowledge of the writings of St.
Thomas of Aquin. Among other theses, he defended the doctrinal
infallibility of the pope, the indirect authority of the latter over temporal matters, and the right of resistence to tyrannical rulers. In 1 527
he published a ponderous and rather mordant refutation of Luther’s
doctrine of matrimony. Luther had denounced the Dominicans of the

University of Cologne as asses, dogs, and swine.

Ambrose Pelargus of Hesse, John Fabri of Heilbronn, Bartholo
mew Kleindienst of Annaberg, John Dietenberger, a native of Frank-

CATHOLIC APOLOGETICS AGAINST LUTHER

369

fort on the Main, and Michael Vehe of Biberach were members of
the same Dominican province. Dietenberger was the author of an
excellent catechism. He also translated the Bible and composed about
fifteen controversial works, which are noted for their learning and
acumen. They place their author in the first rank of the Dominican
champions of the faith. He labored chiefly in Frankfort on the Main,
in Treves, and in Koblenz. His works, composed exclusively in German, are written in a plain and fluent style, whereas many other

controversialists of the time, less practiced in the use of their mothertongue, wrote ponderously in Latin.

Michael John Vehe labored in the service of Archbishop Albrecht
of Brandenburg. After the diet of Augsburg, he was appointed by
the archbishop a member of the “Neues Stift” of Halle, of which he
subsequently became provost. In 1531 he published an excellent treatise on the “Reception of the Blessed Sacrament under One Species.”
It was composed in good German.

Next to the Dominicans, the Franciscans were represented by a
gallant host of apologists of the Church. At the close of the Middle
Ages, an energetic spirit of religious reform, sprung from the bosom
of this Order, had made its influence felt throughout Germany. Life

within the monasteries of the Poor Man of Assisi, as described by

John Eberlin, a Franciscan who had apostatized to Lutheranism, was

very edifying, characterized by penance, prayer, and zeal for souls.?®
Eberlin makes only one, and that a curious, complaint, namely, that
“the devil artfully uses their piety in order to corrupt humanity

with a false religion.” The example of good monastic discipline alone
was a defense against the religious innovation—a brilliant refutation
of the Lutheran attack upon Catholic morality. This practical defense was seconded by the writings and sermons of excellent and
learned religious.

The Franciscan Augustine Alfeld, for example, entered the lists
at Leipsic, in the beginning of the religious controversy, with his
work “Super Apostolica Sede.” Owing to his clear insight, he at once
made the question of the primacy of the Roman see the central point
of controversy. His industrious and popular pen produced fifteen
Latin and German works, the style of the latter being superior to
that of the former, “remarkable alike for vigor and fervor.” ** Caspar
93 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 128 sq.

:

94 Thus L. Lemmens, O. S. Fr., in his monograph Pater Aug. v. Alfeld (1899), p. 99

370

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

Schatzgeyer, provincial of the Upper German province of the Franciscan Observantines, was another capable writer whose works en-

joyed even greater popularity. Thomas Murner, John Findling and
Conrad Kling were members of the same Order, as were also Nicholas Ferber of Herborn, who labored with success in Hesse and
Cologne; John Wild (Ferus), a preacher and writer at Mayence, and
many other apologists and controversialists.
Of the Augustinian Order we shall only mention Bartholomew
Usingen (Arnoldi), Luther’s one-time teacher, and Konrad Triger.
The learned Nicholas Ellenbog of Ottobeuren was a member of the
Benedictine Order, and Paul Bachmann belonged to that of the Cistercians.

Certain converts who excelled in writing, among them Vitus Amerbach, Theobald Billican, and later George Witzel, constituted a special and very remarkable phalanx of apologists.
A great number of secular priests, besides those already mentioned,
deserve recognition for their apologetic labors in the academic spheres
and in the pulpit. Let us but mention Jerome Dungersheim of Leip-

sic, Ottmar Luscinius (Nachtigall) of Augsburg, and Konrad Wimpina, the soul of the newly-founded university of Frankfort on the

Oder. An idea of the great number of German authors who wrote
prior to the commencement of the Council of Trent, may be formed
when it is recalled that the learned historian F. Falk published the
names of 105 such writers in the Katholik, in 1891, and Nicholas
Paulus, writing in 1892 and 1893, supplemented this list by the addition of 161 names of writers, without making any claim to completeness.®® Who knows how many wavering souls were brought
back to the Church, or confirmed in the faith, through the efforts of
these apologists! That German Catholicism laid down its arms and

surrendered to Luther is an assertion which, at the present time, can

be attributed only to ignorance.

Non-German countries also furnished quite a number of defenders
of the faith, some of whom were very brilliant. Thus, in the Netherlands, Jacob Latomus (Masson) of the University of Louvain
was
very active in opposing Luther as early as 1518, and again in 1§29,

when his work “De Primatu” appeared. Luther regarded him as
superior to all his other opponents, including Erasmus, who,
he
95 Katholik,

1891, Vol. 71, pp. 4503qq.

73, pp- 213 5qq. (Paulus),

(Falk);

1892, Vol. 72,

PP

545 599.;

1893, Vol.

SPREAD OF THE RELIGIOUS REVOLT

371

said, in comparison with Latomus, could only croak. In France, Jodocus Clichtovaeus, of the Paris Sorbonne, achieved celebrity by his
“Antilutherus” (1524) and his “Propugnaculum Ecclesiae adversus
Lutheranos (1526),” etc. In England the apologetical writings of

King Henry VIII and his famous chancellor, Sir Thomas More, as well

as those of John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, published in 1523, 1525,
etc., were preéminent. More and Fisher sealed their opposition to the
subsequent schism of Henry VIII with their blood and to-day are
honored by the Church as martyrs to the faith. The “Italian Opponents of Luther,” according to Frederick Lauchert, who published a
monograph on this subject in 1912, comprised no less than sixty-six
scholars, beginning with Sylvester Prierias, Ambrosius Catharinus,
Thomas Cajetan, and Thomas Radinus, who rose in opposition to

Luther during the period preceding the Tridentine Council.
9. FURTHER SPREAD OF THE RELIGIOUS REVOLT

Unmindful of refutations, the new doctrine extended its conquests

under the influence of a false evangelical liberty and through the
forceful intervention of the secular authorities.

In the city of Braunschweig (Brunswick), Bugenhagen, in the
spring of 1528, endeavored to strengthen the Lutheran religion,
which had been introduced there by the magistrate. The magistrate
of Hamburg forthwith summoned him to the latter city to accomplish the same object in the summer of 1529; after a period of inten-

sive organization, he returned to Wittenberg, where Luther, notwithstanding his multifarious labors, had discharged the pastoral duties
in place of Bugenhagen. At the solicitation of the town-council of
Goslar, Amsdorf, while passing through Magdeburg, where he held
a position as preacher, went to Goslar in the same capacity. Luther’s
messengers had been originally banished from Liibeck, until the mag-

sstrate of that town recalled them. In January, 1530, Luther exhorted
them to proceed with courage as well as caution.
In Hesse and electoral Saxony, no less than in Nuremberg, Ulm,
of
and Strasburg, Protestantism spread rapidly under the protectionprothe
after
rulers
and
princes
the
by
formed
the defensive League
testation of Spires. Ferdinand, the representative of the Emperor,
the
was authorized by a law of the Empire to avenge by force of armsthenew
the
of
s
progres
the
in
d
manifest civil insubordination reveale

372

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530

ology and the League. But nothing was done. Luther was content to
issue a2 warning against the League, which had allied itself, in part,

with Zwinglian elements; he also characterized the rebellion as a
misfortune.?®
In Pomerania, Lutheranism gradually gained ground under the
patronage of Duke Barnim XI, who had studied at Wittenberg
and remained in communication with Luther.
Paul Speratus, who, having been condemned to the stake at Iglau
because he had preached the new religion in Austria, was pardoned
and became preacher at the court of Duke Albrecht of Prussia at

Kénigsberg, and later (1530) so-called bishop of Pomesania, where
he indefatigably preached the new gospel and combatted the Anabaptists and Schwenckfeldians.

In the electorate of Brandenburg, Joachim I, the elector, vigorously

excluded Lutheranism from his jurisdiction. His wife, Elizabeth, who

had been captivated by the new theology, secretly escaped from Berlin to Torgau, and thence to the vicinity of Luther, who called her his
“Madam Godmother.” After the death of the vacillating Margrave

Casimir, in 1527, the Frankish-Brandenburgian territory was openly
Protestantized by his successor, George, who, residing in Franconia,

became one of the most active and influential Protestant princes.

Several times Luther communicated directly with the adherents
of the new theology in Livonia, which was subject to the Teutonic
Order. Thus, in 1523 and again 1524, he addressed letters to
the

Christians of Riga. In 1525 he wrote an epistle “to the Livonians.”

In 1525, the inhabitants of Danzig requested him to send them
a
preacher. The movement was impetuous, but was suppressed
for the
time being by the King of Poland.
In July, 1527, Gustavus Wasa forcibly introduced the new
religion
into the kingdom of Sweden; in doing so, he was “essenti
ally influenced by political motives.” °7
In Denmark, Christian II, who at that time also
governed Sweden,

had favored Lutheranism for political reasons, because he feared
influence of the Catholic clergy. Having been banish

he entered upon intimate relations with Luther. The

the

ed to Germany,

latter, owing to

98 Cf. Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, pp. 72 and 79
(Briefwechsel, VII, pp. 101 and 110), on
May
22 and at the end of May, 1529. But
see infra ch. XIV, no. 1; furthermore,
KéstlinKawerau, M. Luther, Vol. 11, p. 184, and
Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 44 sq., on Luther’s
vacillating attitude relative to armed resistanc
e,

97 Thus Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Lutbker, Vol. 1,
p. 625.

SPREAD OF THE RELIGIOUS REVOLT

373

his ignorance of human nature and because he hoped for a change
in religion, supported him; however, Christian was not concerned
with religion, but solely with the recovery of his crown. His successor

in Denmark, King Frederick, was sincerely attached to the theological
innovation, which, however, triumphed only during the reign of the
despotic Christian III.

On the basis of certain premature reports concerning Italy, which
he had received from Gabriel Zwilling of Torgau, Luther wrote to
him on March 7, 1528: “I am delighted to hear that the Venetians
have accepted the Word of God.” ®® In this instance, as in the case

of Christian II of Denmark, he deceived himself. For though the
writings of Luther had penetrated Venice, and Italy in general, there
was but a slight movement in favor of his cause. In Italy as well as in
Spain, the sharp-sighted Inquisition took precautions to prevent the
propagation of the new anti-ecclesiastical ideas.
98 Briefwechsel, VI, p. 222.

CuAarTER XIII

THE DIET OF AUGSBURG (1530) AND LUTHER AT
COBURG CASTLE

I. THE DIET OF AUGSBURG

Emperor Charles V was finally able to set out on his journey to
Germany, for which the German Catholics had ardently longed. The
treaty of Barcelona with the pope, and the treaty of Cambrai with
Francis, king of France, had opened the way for him.
On January 21, 1530, shortly before his coronation as emperor,
Charles published at Bologna the convocation of the imperial diet at
Augsburg, in which he himself intended to take an active part. It was
his wish that the diet should remove—peaceably, if possible—the
grounds for the religious controversy which filled him with anxiety.
It was the intention of this zealous Catholic ruler, sincerely to adopt
the ways of kindness and to effect an arrangement by peaceful
methods. For this reason the convocation adopted a conciliatory tone
and assured the Protestants that they would be given 2 hearing.
The Emperor’s brother, Ferdinand, journeyed to the Brenner in
Tyrol, to meet Charles as the latter was coming from Italy. At Gries,
on the northern declivity of the mountain, there is 2 monumental
inscription marking the spot where the brothers embraced each other.

Charles was depressed by Ferdinand’s report of the existing conditions.
Nevertheless, on June 15, the high-minded Emperor hopefully entered
the city of Augsburg.
This ancient free city on the Lech, a flourishing center of art and
commerce, still retained its venerable towered walls with moats and
gates. Inside were the homes of the wealthy and comfortably situated

patricians, and lofty, antique buildings, conspicuous among them the

palace of the bishop and the splendid town-hall, where the sessions of
the diet were to be held. Both have since been either replaced by other

structures or completely remodeled. The banking house of the Fug-

gers, which had been established ten years before, still exists, a vivid
reminder of the great commercial firm which once dominated inter374

