CHAPTER II

LUTHER'’S FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY
I. NOVITIATE, PROFESSION, FIRST MASS

The completion of a year’s novitiate was the first obligation
incumbent on the new monk. During this probationary period
he was

not permitted to study. Prayer, pious reading,
labor and penances,

service in the choir, and mastering the rules and
life of the Order
occupied his time. For this purpose the novices were
assigned to the
direction of an elder monk. Luther was placed under
an experienced
novice-master whom he praised in later years
as a wise and sympa-

thetic religious. The master of novices explained
to him the statutes
of the Order, which John Staupitz, at that time
superior of the entire
congregation, had composed in 1504
on the basis of the old con-

stitutions, adapted with wise discretion to

the needs of the age. They
were detailed and precise, but tolerated many
dispensations in the

monastic observance. The master of novice
s also saw to it that
young novice entrusted to his care
diligently read the Bible.

the

The statutes enjoined upon all the duty of
“reading the Bible with
fervor, to hear it read with devotion, and
to learn it with assiduity.”
To hold that the Sacred Scriptures were
not in the hands of the
faithful, even of the pious, in the days
when Luther was a youth,
is a wide-spread error. In the case of
Luther himself, who afterwards
rendered this statement current, there
was not a day “on which the
Word of the Scriptures was not perce
ived abundantly by ear and
intellect. It came to be a permanent compa
nion, a monitor and com-

forter, a judge and a benefactor.” From
that day a pronounced inclination towards the Bible began to
take hold of him.

“Besides the Bible, the young novi
ce joyfully saturated his mind
with the writings of St. Bernard
and St. Bonaventure, those profound and sympathetic teachers of
the Middle Ages. His spiritual
director understood how to comf
ort and guide the novice, who
at
1 Scheel, M. Luther, 11, 2 ed., p. 2.

44

NOVITIATE, PROFESSION, FIRST MASS

45

times showed a lack of courage. Long afterwards Luther remembered
how the good man spoke to him of the remission of sins and occasionally called his attention to the fact that the article of faith on the
remissio peccatorum must be set up against all scruples.

Brother Martin willingly adapted himself to the discipline of the
well-regulated monastery. He learned to love his new abode, was
determined to become a good monk, and resolved to devote his
energies to the salvation of souls.
At the commencement of his novitiate, he received sad reports
from Mansfeld, where his family resided. The pestilence invaded the
little town and carried off two of his brothers. His heart, on the
other hand, was gladdened at the news of his father’s belated consent

to his entrance upon a monastic career. It was difficult for the father to relinquish the hopes he had placed in a secular career for his
highly promising son. Perhaps the affliction with which his home had
been visited moderated his attitude.
When the probationary year had terminated and the hour for the
taking of the solemn vows had arrived, Brother Martin, advancing

to the altar of the Augustinian church at Erfurt, unperturbed by
misgivings and with joy in his heart, made profession of the vows
that bind forever. The vows were couched in the usual form:

«], Brother Martin, make profession and vow obedience before Almighty God and the ever Blessed Virgin Mary, and before you,
Brother Winand, local prior, in the name and place of the prior general of the Order of Hermits of the holy Bishop Augustine, and his
lawful successors, to live without property and in chastity according
to the rule of the same Blessed Augustine to the end of my life.” No

act of his life, no promise ever made by him, took place after such
mature deliberation and with such a complete knowledge of the circumstances and obligations, as this oblation of himself to the divine
Majesty in the bosom of the universal Church by means of the triple
vow of poverty, chastity, and obedience. The act was witnessed by
the community of those who were to be henceforth more closely
united to him.

Luther was now a full-fledged member of the German Congrega-

tion of the Hermits of St. Augustine, who, as a Congregation of
Observantines, were subordinated to John Staupitz, the vicar or

representative of the general of the Order who resided in Rome. Be-

sides the monasteries of the congregation of the Observantines, there

46

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

existed in Germany numerous other Augustinian monasteries which
had not introduced the Observance. They constituted the so-called

Provincia Saxoniae, and extended over central and upper Germany.
According to the general administration of the Order, they were
under the jurisdiction of a provincial. Both, Observantines and nonObservantines, were classified under the common canonical charac-

ter of mendicant friars, with this sole exception that the Observantines had their own peculiar exercises which were conducted in the
spirit of the enthusiastic founder and father of their Order, Andrew
Proles, the predecessor of Staupitz (died in 1503 at Kulmbach).

Luther was not exempt from the task of begging alms. Despite

the fact that he possessed the master’s degree, he was obliged to assume this task like other humiliating exercises of the Order. Some
years afterwards, however, in view of his academic degree and of
the studies he was destined to pursue, he was absolved from the obli-

gation of the “saccum per naccum,” as begging with a sack about the

neck was humorously termed in the monastery.

As the day of his ordination to the priesthood was approaching,
Luther read the thoughtful and edifying treatise on the holy sacrifice
of the Mass by Gabriel Biel—but as he assures us after his defection from the ancient Church, he did so with a bleeding heart.

His disposition inclined him to view with terror the thought of
the
sublimity of the sacred function no less than the idea of intimate

union with God through the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ. In the second semester of 1506, the preliminary orders of the
subdiaconate and diaconate were conferred upon him. These
events
were followed by his ordination to the priesthood, probably on April
3, 1507. He received holy orders in the magnificent dome

of Erfurt,

at the hands of the suffragan bishop, John Bonemilch von Lasphe.
His
soul now highly stimulated, he prepared himself for the
celebration
of his first holy Mass. The extant letters in which he extende
d an
invitation to his various acquaintances to be present on
the greatest
day of his life—for it was celebrated with great solemnity—reve
al
his profound earnestness and lively realization of his own unworth
iness. The style of these letters is invested with a certain
pathos, be it

in consequence of the humanism he formerly cultivat

of his natural disposition.

ed, or as a result

:
While he said his first Mass at the altar of the August
inian church,
the thought of the proximity and magnitude of almigh
ty God caused

NOVITIATE, PROFESSION, FIRST MASS

47

him to be seized with such fright that he would fain have interrupted the holy Sacrifice and hastened away from the altar, had not
the assistant priest held him back. The reports which have come to
us from his own lips, as well as those contained in the copy of his
lectures on Genesis, are too definite as to permit the possibility of a
doubt concerning the abnormal event.? Afterwards he said that he
always said Mass with a shudder, aye, “with great horror.”
His father, accompanied by no less than twenty riders, arrived for

the celebration on horseback, defraying his own expenses. At the

festive banquet, Martin desired to persuade his father to give a
new and open approval to his entrance into the monastery, since
his previous consent had not been whole-hearted. Therefore, Martin

praised the “pleasant and quiet” life of the monastery and the “divine

nature” of his chosen state of life. But when he mentioned the heavenly call on the occasion of the storm at Stotternheim, his father
became angry and exclaimed: “Would to God that it was not a
hallucination of the devil!” He was a choleric man and his patience
was exhausted. The select company which surrcunded him did not

restrain him from giving vent to his displeasure. He even remarked,
though without justification, whether the son had forgotten that
children owe complete obedience to their parents as regards entrance

into the cloister, that the fourth commandment was above the notion
which induced him to select the monastic state, etc. It must have
been an unpleasant scene when the monks, who were seated next to
them, tried to defend the monastic life and their promising confrére. Thereat the father expressed himself in these acrid words: “I
would prefer to be somewhere else rather than to be here, eating

and drinking.” To such an extent his irascible temperament led him
to forget the requirements of the festive occasion. In course of time,
however, the old man became reconciled. When Luther, fourteen

years later, was in open conflict with his monastic order 2s a result
of the publication of his treatise against the monastic vow, he justified the conduct of his father in the preface of the dedicatory letter
which he addressed to him by citing the latter’s statement relative
am unable to regard as
2 See the citations from the sources in Scheel II, pp. 345 sq. I the
Table Talks and the
in
account
Luther’s
sound the objections variously raised against
statements contained in his commentary on Genesis. Cf. Grisar, Luther, 1, p. 15; VI, pp.
99 sqq., 195 $q4q.

8 Cf. Grisar, op cit.,, VI, 197.

48

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

to the obedience due to parents.* It seems never to have disturbed
him previously. But in the aforementioned treatise (xrs21) he
assured his readers that the words which his father uttered on the

occasion of his first Mass made a deep impression on him, “as if God
Himself had spoken them.”
2. STUDIES AND FIRST EXPERIENCE AS TEACHE
R

After his first Mass, Martin began the study of theolog
y. John
Nathin, a celebrated teacher of his Order, was prefect of theologi
cal
studies in the Erfurt monastery. But Martin was
not introduced

into positive and speculative theology in an orderly

fashion. After

about a year and a half spent in the study of Gabrie
l Biel’s treatise
on the “Sentences” and other Nominalistic writers
, his superiors
in the autumn of 1508 transferred him to the August
inian monastery
of Wittenberg, where he was ordered to lecture at
once on the Nicomachean Ethics while he continued his theolo
gical studies.

At Wittenberg Luther came into closer
personal contact with
Staupitz, the vicar of his Order, with
whom he probably had had
converse already at Erfurt. At his instig
ation, he was promoted to

the baccalaureate in Sacred Scripture at the
1509. Luther had made the reading of

university, on March 9,

the Bible his specialty; it ap-

pealed to him more than Scholasticis
m and methodical scientific
works. For this reason, and because of
his talents, Staupitz kept an
eye on him, in order eventually to make
him his successor in the
academic chair of Biblical science, whic
h had been entrusted to the

Augustinians, but to which he could

not do full justice on account

of his official journeys. The Biblical bacca

laureate was a preliminary
step for Luther. It obliged him to
explain certain parts of Sacred
Scripture to his academic audie
nces. Later he was appointed
to the
office of “semtentiarius,” which entit
led him to deliver university lectures on the celebrated Book
of Sentences of Peter Lombard.
He advanced to this dignity in the
autumn of 1509. It terminated

his first sojourn at Wittenberg. The
Order sent him back to Erfurt,
where a sententiarius was needed.
Due to these labors, his own
further training must have been consi
derably neglected.
Luther’s interior life during the
days spent at Erfurt and Witten4 Werke, Weimar ed., VIII, pp. $73 Q.

FIRST EXPERIENCE AS TEACHER

49

berg was constantly furrowed by deep anxiety. The terrors from
which he suffered at the beginning of his monastic life, would not
desert him. He continued to worry about the sternness of the divine
Judge, the remission of his sins, and the problem of predestination

by an alleged and inscrutable divine decree. In part these terrors
were caused by his psychological condition, which, when later symptoms are taken into consideration, seems to have been a kind of precordial fear; in part, they were the product of melancholy thoughts
which he harbored and which re-acted upon his physical condition.
On one occasion, while attending divine service in the choir of the

monks, he fell prostrate to the floor and was racked by convulsions,
as the Gospel of the demoniac was being sung, and screamed aloud:
“Tt is not I! It is not I!” (meaning that he was not the man possessed).® No mention of epilepsy is made in his subsequent history.

The many later references made by him to his mental sufferings during this period, lack precision. They may pertain to his sojourn at
Wittenberg or to his first residence at Erfurt, or to both.

He says that his life in the cloister was always sad. When he
discussed his sins with Staupitz and raised all kinds of imaginary objections, the latter told him to dismiss the specter of his “puppet
sins.” His thoughts, which were replete with fantasies, appeared
unintelligible to others; few knew how to console him as well as

Master Bartholomew (Usingen), whom he styled the “best paraclete
and comforter” in the Erfurt monastery.® Once Staupitz told him:
“Master Martin, I do not understand that.” On another occasion

Luther was deeply impressed as Staupitz admonished him when
he was affrightened at the idea of predestination: “Why torment
yourself with such thoughts and broodings? Look at the wounds of
Christ and His blood shed for you! There you will see your predestination to Heaven shining forth to your comfort.” ¥ Yet, in many
passages of his later writings and addresses Luther says of his monastic life: “My heart trembles and flutters, when I meditate on how

God may be merciful to me. Often have I been frightened at the
name of Jesus, and, when I looked upon Him as He hung upon the
cross, He was as lightning to me.” He was often compelled to say:,
«] wish there were no God.” Never, so he says with exaggeration
8 Grisar, Luther, I, p. 17.

8 1bid., 1, p. 10,

T Ibid., p. 11.

50

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

had he been able to recite a prayer properly. He had lived in great
tortures and at times so sensed the terrors of God’s judgment “that

his hair stood on end.” He became startled when death or the future
life was discussed in the monastery.® According to his representations, it was principally his good friend Staupitz who prevente

d him

from being “drowned,” as he puts it, in the fear of predestination.

But, are not many polemical admixtures recognizable in these
portrayals of his depressed and melancholy state of mind in
the monastery, from which he alleged he was forced to flee?
When Luther left Wittenberg, he had neglected to deliver
the

necessary introductory lecture

as

semfentiarius.

As

a

consequence

the scrupulous theologians of Erfurt did not want to let him

lecture

on the Books of Sentences there; they may also have
been unfavorably disposed toward him for other reasons. Howeve
r, in the end he

was permitted to lecture.

The notes on Peter Lombard which he penned in

those days reveal

an active mind, but at the same time an adverse
and extremely sur-

prising self-conscious

mannerism of formulating judgments. He
sneers at the drolleries of contemporary theolog
ians, at “the rotten
rules of the logicians,” at the masks worn
by the “philosophers,”
at “the rancid philosopher Aristotle.” For the
latter he showed a decided aversion. At the very beginning of
his career he styles him a
comedian whom he would unmask. The Middl
e Ages had appreciated
Aristotle quite differently. But Luther showe
d a contentious and an
audacious spirit already at Wittenberg. Mathes
ius, his eulogist, says

of him: “Our Frater Martinus there applie

Sacred Scripture, and commenced to disput

d himself to the study of

e in the university against

the sophistry which was everywhere in vogue

at that time. And since
all schools, monasteries, and pulpits
appealed to the ‘master of
sublime thought’ (Peter Lombard), beside
s Thomas of Aquin, Scotus,
and Albertus, in support of the found
ation of Christianity, our

Frater Martinus began to dispute agains
t their principles, at which
good people were highly amazed even
at that time.”

The Erfurt professors were probably consp
icuous among the “good
people” who opposed Luther. It is
not incredible that, as he relates
afterwards, the Bible, which served
the fiery combatant as a means
for his boastfulness, may have been
withheld from him for a while.
In order to understand his belov
ed Bible properly, Luther began
to
81bid., 111, p. 109.

FIRST EXPERIENCE AS TEACHER

ST

study Greek under the direction of John Lang, a fellow-member
of his Order, who had a humanistic training and shared his opinions,
- Luther’s studious spirit also impelled him to take up certain writings

of St. Augustine, the founder of his Order and a doctor of the
Church. We have marginal notes made by him in 1509 on certain
treatises of Augustine. But owing to his lack of leisure and his pre-

conceived notions he was not able to fathom their depth. Augustine’s
teachings on grace, free will, and justification, on natural good works

and acts meritorious for Heaven, really remained a sealed book for

him all his life. In vain he appealed to particular passages to support
his own peculiar opinions.

The town of Erfurt was hardly aware of Luther’s residence at the
highly esteemed Augustinian monastery. Luther himself is silent for
a long time concerning the storms and struggles which the town

experienced. It is only afterwards that he mentions Erfurt, and then

with a feeling of resentment. In January, 1510, the ancient city
council of Erfurt was violently deposed by a popular democratic

party. The Saxon Elector opposed both the insurgent workers and
the rights of the Archbishop of Mayence, who ruled the town. The
spacious “old college” in which the university lectures were delivered,
was destroyed on August 4, in a riot between the students and the

municipal lansquenets. It was the “frantic year,” as it is called in the
annals of the city. During this uprising Luther lectured in perfect

peace in the quiet halls of the Augustinian monastery.

In this same year, 1510, 2 grave controversy broke out in the
Observantine Augustinian congregation. It was occasioned by the
vicar, John Staupitz, who jeopardized the canonical and disciplinary
autonomy of the Observantine monasteries entrusted to his care. He
intended to affiliate them with the monasteries of the German Augustinian province, who were non-Observantines. The consolidation of

the province, which had hitherto been directed by separate provincials,
with the monasteries of his own jurisdiction would have greatly
extended his authority. He counted upon the support of the General of the Order and increased vigor in the life of the German
monasteries, although no noticeable decline had been manifested by
them.

,

The monks of Erfurt and of six other monasteries of the Observantine congregation judged otherwise. They considered their observance

jeopardized by the influence of the communities which had affiliated

52

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

with them and insisted upon the privileges of their congregation,
which was protected in virtue of papal legislation against the arbi-

trary interference of the General. In the Franciscan Order, Brother
Louis of Anhalt, whom Luther met at Magdeburg, had effectually

defended the Observantine monasteries of St. Francis in Germany,
whose constitutions enjoyed papal sanction, in the interests of the
stricter life, against Aegidius Delfini, the General of his Order.? In

this posture of affairs, Luther assumed the role of eloquent spokes-

man against Staupitz and, in behalf of the insurgent monasteries,

was sent to Halle in company with the theologian John Nathin,
where Adolph von Anhalt, the provost of Magdeburg cathedral, sojourned. Both appealed for assistance to the provost. In order to

assure themselves of success, the monasteries decided to send Luther
to the headquarters of the order at Rome and to the papal curia.
This was the occasion of Luther’s journey to Rome, an event destined to become highly significant in his life.
3.

THE

JOURNEY

TO

ROME

After having spent a considerable part of his life in the narrow
confines of the monastery and in academic halls, the journey to Rome
was bound to bring the active mind of young Luther in contact
for the first time with the great ecclesiastical world. He was to receive an abundance of new ideas. He was destined also to become
aware of the religious and moral abuses which had been accumula
ting
on all sides, but particularly in the Rome of the Renaissance.
In the
late autumn of 1510 he commenced his journey on foot, in accordance with a custom of his Order, accompanied by a fellow
member.
They travelled through Bavaria and over the mountains to
Tyrol,
thence, from Innsbruck over the Brenner Pass to Lombar
dy and
beyond. Following the usual road of the pilgrims, they crossed
Central Italy and proceeded via Viterbo and Lake Bolsena
to the Eternal

City. Whenever practicable, he called upon the numero

us monasteries

along the road and enjoyed their hospitality. The hardshi

winter season, just previous to the close of the

ps of the

year, were probably

not small. With reinvigorated energy he ascend
ed the heights of
Mario, whence he obtained his first sight of
Rome. Near a chapel

he knelt down and recited the customary prayer
s of pilgrims, in
¥ Cf. Lemmens, Franziskanerbriefe, pp.
20 sqq.

THE JOURNEY TO ROME

53

greeting the sacred walls and plains, the home of innumerable saints
- and martyrs. In Rome he took up his abode with his fellow-monks.

To his great disappointment, his mission in behalf of the Observantine faction proved futile. He was advised that he would have to
obtain a letter from the legitimate superior of his order in Germany
(i. e., Staupitz) in order to gain admission to the papal curia. He
had no such a letter, and the General of the Augustinians as well
as his procurator, who were not in favor of his mission, refused to
intervene in his behalf. The efforts of the seven monasteries were

unwelcome to them. Again, he must have poignantly felt another
failure, namely, the refusal of the papal authorities to grant a petition
which his passionate fondness for study had inspired. In some cases,
religious had been given permission to devote certain years to study

at the universities, outside of their monasteries and without appearing

in the habit of their order. Luther’s request to have this extraordinary privilege extended to the German Augustinians was declined

because he had no recommendation of his superiors. The report of his
pupil Oldecop on this subject is trustworthy, since during his stay at
Rome, some time after this incident, Oldecop made inquiries concerning this matter. Luther compensated himself by studying Hebrew
with 2 German Jew at Rome. He also made it his business to visit

all the sacred places in Rome, and to become acquainted with the
religious monuments of the city. He hunted up, he says, all the
churches and crypts. The traditions of the various places edified
him; he did not balk even at the false ones. Only at the so-called

Stairs of Pilate, in the vicinity of the Lateran palace, which he

climbed on his knees in accordance with custom, the question arose

in his mind whether the tremendous indulgences connected with
these steps were indeed genuine.!® This doubt, however, was not the

germ of his subsequent doctrine of justification without good works,
as has been asserted, but was occasioned by the uncritical Mirabilia

Vrbis Romae—a guide-book for pilgrims which was in circulation at
that time. No trace of so-called reformatory ideas can be detected in
Luther either at the time of his pilgrimage to Rome or for some
considerable time thereafter.

He was, however, deeply depressed by what he saw of the decline
of morality in Rome, including the higher and the lower clergy.
Especially what he heard concerning the person and court of the
10 Grisar, Luther, VI, 496.

54

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

recently deceased Borgia Pope, Alexander VI, his relatives, certain
cardinals, the pomp and worldliness of Julius II

(Giuliano della

Rovere), the then reigning warrior-like successor of Alexander VI,

sank deep into the soul of the receptive northerner. These recollections were violently revived during his subsequent contest with
Rome and furnished him with weapons against the Roman Anti-

christ, whose true character he fancied to have discovered in another
manner. He appears, while at Rome, to have come in contact with

German and Italian residents who collected reproaches against the
morals of the curia in an odious and at times frivolously exaggerated

form and apparently took less note of the prevailing good traits
in the life of the city and the supreme government of the Church.
The same holds good in regard to his entire journey through Italy.
An honorable exception were the great hospitals he visited, with

their ample equipment and the charity which they dispensed. The
exemplary care of the sick and of poor pilgrims exhibited at Florence
elicited favorable comments from him later on.

It appears that the splendid edifices and the grand works of this
period, inspired by the joyousness of creative art, at Rome as well as

along the whole way of his journey, failed to attract his attention.
Even in his advanced years he relished no taste for the creations of art.

As a pilgrim to Rome, he lacked the proper enlightenment to appre-

ciate these matters.

When Luther, after his apostasy, described himself as having been
the most pious monk at Rome, who said Mass so solemnly and slowly
that several other priests finished saying Mass at the same time, and

when he maintains that, inspired by the great Roman indulgences
applicable to the souls of the departed, he in his pious zeal wished
that his parents had already departed this life, so that he might gain

these indulgences in their behalf—we have a series of grotesqu

e ex-

aggerations, suggested partly by his native humor,
partly by exag-

gerated criticism of Roman conditions. We know
that he did not
say Mass regularly while in Rome. According
to a later declara-

tion of his, he desired to make a general confess
ion extending over

his whole life, but found the clergy in Rome insuffi
ciently instructed
for this purpose. Whatever he says about condit
ions or his own

monastic virtues must be received with a large

grain of salt.

At all events, it is certain that his visit in the center
of Catholic
Christianity did not shake his devotion to the
Church, nor his sub-

IN WITTENBERG

55

mission to the papal authority, nor his loyalty to the monastic state,
though the subsequent crisis was accelerated thereby.

His stay in the city on the Tiber lasted about four weeks. Luther
did not get to see Pope Julius, who, on account of threatening war,
had betaken himself to Upper Italy. Luther did not return to Ger-

many by way of Lombardy and across the Tyrolean Alps, but, due
to the danger of war, made a detour over Nizza and the Avignon

country, up the valley of the Rhone towards Switzerland and thence
to Bavaria. Some traces of this journey have been preserved.'’ Nor
did the pilgrim return to Erfurt, but, in compliance with the orders

of his superiors, went to Wittenberg to teach, a choice which probably conformed with his own desire.
4.

IN WITTENBERG

The Augustinians of Wittenberg did not participate in the attack

upon Staupitz in connection with the Observantine controversy.

The party of the vicar was in control there. What attitude did Luther
assume towards him? When he re-entered Germany, his views about
this internal question of discipline were different from those which

impelled him to visit Italy. He became an opponent of the so-called
Observantines and espoused the party of Staupitz. What caused this
striking change has never been fully cleared up. Perhaps the opposition which he encountered at Rome influenced him. Possibly his
transfer from Erfurt to Wittenberg had something to do with his

altered attitude. It is also possible that Staupitz himself influenced
him decisively. Cochlaeus, his subsequent opponent, who at that time
was in touch with the brethren of the Order and had learned from
them some things about Luther, drastically expresses the change in
his conduct thus: “He has apostatized to his friend Staupitz.” For
the rest, his change of attitude need not cause too much surprise in

view of the sanguine temperament of the young monk. It is also
permitted to inquire whether the consolidation contemplated by

Staupitz, did not possess some merit. A uniform government of all
the Augustinian monasteries in Germany under an energetic general
and active provincials, according to the general rule of the order,

was in itself a rather desirable thing.

Romfahrt; Neues iiber den ReisewegTM)
11 H, Grisar, Lutheranalekten, 1 (“Zu LuthersVol.
XXXIX (1919-1920), PP- 487 sqq.

in the Histor. Jabrbuch der Gérresgesellschaft,

56

FIRST YEARS IN THE MONASTERY

The internal conflict was settled in May of the following year at

a chapter of the Augustinian congregations held in Cologne. The

settlement was effected as a result of the conciliatory policy of Staupitz, who had previously brought about a certain union of the seven
convents at Jena, in July, 1511. The proposed consolidation of these

congregations with the Saxon province, i. e., with the non-reformed
German Augustinians, was to be abandoned—a proposition with
which the general now agreed. The Cologne chapter was held with-

out the participation of the “Province of Saxony.” This fact alone
would indicate a certain retreat on the part of Staupitz, even if it
was but a temporary one. In the meantime the opposition within
the congregation, once having manifested itself, continued to smoulder. There were friends of the Observance, and, as it appears, some

enthusiasts, who exhibited a strict compliance with the statutes. On
the other hand there were enemies of the Observance, who complained
of unkindnesses and calumnies on the part of their opponents. In the
congested atmosphere of the monasteries the conflict grew more and
more acute.

At Wittenberg, Luther soon became the passionate spokesman of
the opponents of the Observantines, who were by far the more
numerous party. He had participated in the chapter at Cologne

(1512), as his works testify. On the return journey from Cologne,

he visited the valley of Ehrenbreitstein near Koblenz, where a monastery of his Order was situated at Miihltal.’? Paltz, a celebrated
Augustinian and a native of Erfurt, had retired to this monastery

some time previously, having become dissatisfied with his position
as theological teacher at the “studium generale” of his Order at Erfurt. It is possible that Luther, while at Cologne, had been proposed
for the doctorate in theology at Wittenberg. According to his later
story he raised strenuous objections to the doctorate when Staupitz

subsequently discussed this matter with him in more definite terms

at Wittenberg. His objections were based principally on the state
of his health. In spite of this, however, the superiors would not alter

their decision.

In Wittenberg various tasks diverted him from the preparation for
the doctorate. Thus he was obliged to preach in the smaller monastery church. He was also made subprior in the monastery. On
*2H. Grisar, "Luther zu Koln und Koblenz,” in the jubille number of the Koblenzer
Volkszeitung, February, 1922.

IN WITTENBERG

57

October 4th, he obtained the academic title of licentiate in theology.

‘A few days later, on October gth, we find him at Leipsic, where
he writes out a receipt for fifty guldens, which the Saxon Elector,
Frederick, had assigned to him out of the local exchequer to pay
the expenses of his pending promotion.!® Staupitz declared to the
Elector that the office of Biblical lecturer, which he himself had occupied at Wittenberg, was henceforth to be entrusted permanently

to Luther.!* According to the terms of their endowment these lectures were assigned to the Augustinian monastery. After passing the

required examination, Luther was promoted to the doctorate, on
October 19, 1512, in the castle-church at Wittenberg. The ceremony

was held under the direction of the university professor Andrew
Bodenstein of Karlstadt, with whom Luther in after yeazs lived in
strained relations on account of the controversies which arose over
the new doctrines.
13 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 9.
14 Scheel, II, pp. 311 and 431.

CHAPTER III

STRIKING OUT ALONG NEW ROADS—THE INTERIOR
PROCESS

I. LUTHER’S FIRST BIBLICAL LECTURES—HIS MYSTICISM

The first lectures of the new professor of Biblical science were
delivered in the years 1513 to 1515 and dealt with the Psalms.
Those of his pupils who were monks and had to recite the Divine

Office in choir, were particularly interested in the Psalms. The interpretation offered them by Luther has been preserved in his
works. It is, however, not an explanation made in accordance with
our modern ideas, but rather a collection of allegorical and moral
sentences based upon the text, as was the custom in those days. Luther

justly abandoned this allegorical manner of interpretation in later
life. Non-Catholics have endeavored, without justification, to discover in these lectures the germs of his later teaching. His manner
of expression is often indefinite and elastic and generally more rhetorical than

theologically

correct.

His

teaching

on

justification,

grace, and free will, is, like his other doctrines, still fundamentally
Catholic, or at least can be so interpreted if the dogmatic teaching of the Church is properly understood. Still there are a few indications of the coming change. Take, for instance, his emphatic
assertion that Christ died for all men and his exaggerated opposition

to the doctrine of justification by means of good works.! In general
these lectures reveal talent, religious zeal, and fertile imagination—

qualities which must have charmed his auditors to an unusual degree.

Luther was very amiable and communicative towards his pupils.

His entire personality, the very gleam of his eye, exerted a certain
fascination over those who associated with him.

The young professor of Sacred Scripture displayed a pronounced
inclination towards mysticism. Mysticism had always been cultivated
1Cf. H. Boechmer in Allg. Evang.-Luth. Kirchenzeitung, 1924.
58

