CHAPTER XI

THE

TEMPESTUOUS

YEAR,

1525—LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

For various reasons the year 1525 must be called a tempestuous
year. First of all the Peasants’ War stamped its character upon it.
Germany experienced tumults such as it had never seen before, which

shook Luther’s work and influenced his mind. Seldom was he so vehemently perturbed as during these momentous months, in the
course of which, strange to say, occurred his marriage.

The year 1525 witnessed the formation, on the one hand, of a more

compact union of the Catholic princes opposed to
the new move-

ment, and, on the other, the preparation of the fatal
Protestant

alliance of Torgau and the emergence of the war-like figure of Philip
of Fessen. It marked the energetic assembly of Mayence, which
fanncu the fury of Luther, but also the defection of extensiv
e terri

tories, among them Prussia, and the violent introduction

ligious change in the electorate of Saxony, brought

of the re-

about by the new

Elector. Luther was compelled to wrestle with the

Anabaptists and
c camp, and with

other fanatics, with powerful enemies in the Catholi

the triumphal march of Erasmus’ polemical pamphlet
on free-will, to
which, in 1525, he opposed his treatise “On the Enslav
ed Will,” a
work begotten literally in storm and stress.
Beyond the German frontier Emperor Charle
s was engaged in a

sanguinary contest with the king of France

. Francis was captured at

Pavia, but the victory of the imperial arms led to

serious conflicts with

the Italian States and with Pope Clement VII.
At the same time,
the power of the Turks assumed menacing propor
tions along the
eastern border of the Empire and in the Medite

signs of an energetic: defense, which was made

rranean Sea, with no

impossible by the un-

settled state of the Catholic forces and Luther’s

Christian undertakings against the Turks.
I.

LUTHER

AND

THE

PEASANTS

hostility towards the

WAR

In 1524, the cities of Allstedt and Orlam
iinde in Thuringia

been violently excited by Thomas Miinzer and
278

had

Karlstadt, respectively.

LUTHER AND THE PEASANTS’ WAR

279

Urged by the electoral court of Saxony, Luther visited these unsettled districts in August. In vain he negotiated with Karlstadt in
an inn called the Black Bear at Jena. (At the end of the conference,
Luther presented Karlstadt with a golden coin as a token that the latter might write against him.) Thence he proceeded to Orlamiinde,
where, as he writes, he was lucky that he was not “expelled with
stones and mud.” ' Karlstadt, as we have seen, was thereupon officially banished from the electorate. Soon afterwards, however, he
continued his agitation in the city of Rothenburg on the Tauber.
Miinzer meanwhile went to Miihlhausen, a highly developed industrial center, where evangelical preachers had already succeeded in
creating a great ferment. A riot ensued, but Miinzer was compelled
to flee from Saxony and thereupon propagated his revolutionary ideas
in southern Germany and allied himself with the Anabaptists of
Zurich.
It was generally believed among citizens and peasants that a serious

revolt against the princes and the clergy was imminent in 1524.
The revolt actually commenced in southwestern Germany in support of the movement which had been started by Miinzer and his

associate, Pfeifer, at Miihlhausen. It spread over a large part of
Thuringia and the Harz mountain district. According to an exaggerated expression of Luther, Miinzer, after his return to Miihlhausen, was rex et imperator of that city. 2 The sanguinary insurrection

was supported by the discontented peasants, who had been misguided
in spiritual matters, and was preached by this fanatic, “the servant of
God against the godless, armed with the sword of Gedeon.”
Peasant revolts against the rulers had not been infrequent towards
the close of the Middle Ages, caused partly by the oppressive con-

ditions under which the peasantry lived, and partly by the spread
of insurrectionary and revolutionary social ideas. Now, however,
these insurrections derived their impetus from the Lutheran ideas

and slogans which had permeated the masses. It would be unhistorical

to throw the entire responsibility for the gigantic movement upon

Luther. Nevertheless, it cannot be gainsaid that the ideas and preachers of the new movement were intimately connected with it. The
'
doctrine of evangelical liberty played the principal role.
absod
demande
only
not
In most districts the rebellious peasants
1 Kastlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, 1903, Vol. I, p. 681.
2 De Wette, II, p. 644.

280

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

lute liberty to change their religion, or at least the confiscation of
church property and the cessation of clerical privileges, but they also
increased their justifiable temporal demands in the name of the socalled evangelical liberty by claiming the most unwarrantable liberties, privileges, and tributes. This is illustrated by the Twelve
Articles, which became current at the beginning of the Peasants’
War. They were composed by Balthasar Hubmaier, a native of Waldshut, an apostate priest who had formerly been stationed at the cathedral of Ratisbon, but latterly had become a preacher of the new
religion. The very first article demands for every congregation the
right to elect and depose its pastor; the elected pastor is obliged to
preach the gospel without any admixture and in plain terms. According to the last article, emancipation from most of the tithes,
from the status of serfdom, from the manifold feudal burdens and
obligations which is insisted on in the remaining articles, should be
demonstrated from Sacred Scripture.
Fundamentally, however, brute force governed the movement. For
the first time the masses, incited by the preachers of the new Evangel,
became conscious of the power that inheres in union.

How often had not Luther himself summoned his followers to

destroy the churches, monasteries, and dioceses of Antichrist, ® True
he desired this to be done by the authorities, but the peasants felt
that they were the authorities. Then, too, without mentioning the
authorities, he repeatedly pointed out, in his violent and inconsiderate
language, that an insurrection of the masses was inevitable. It ap-

peared to the peasants that their hour for acting had now arrived.

The conflagration began in August, 1524, in the southern region
of the Black Forest, near Waldshut, It burst into flames at the begin-

ning of 1525, in the territory of the prince-abbot of Kempten
. In
consequence of the advantages which the peasants of that
place had
gained for themselves, almost the entire peasantry of southwes
tern
Germany, to the Lake of Constance and the Upper Rhine,
rose in
open rebellion. The resistance of the Swabian League in Wiirtte
mberg
was paralyzed by the invasion of the exiled Duke Ulrich. The
peas-

ants stormed

and burned castles

and monasteries

and plundered

churches. Priests and noblemen were subjected to horrible maltreat
ment. From Swabia the horror soon spread to the

-

Odenwald and to

Franconia. In the latter region alone 200 monasteries
3 For examples sce the above and later sections.

and castles were

LUTHER AND THE PEASANTS WAR

281

sacked and wholly or partly destroyed. The atrocities committed at
Weinsberg constituted a horrible climax.

In South Germany, however, the irregular peasant bands at the
beginning of May succumbed to the strategy of the leader of the
Swabian League, Count George Truchsess von Waldburg. They were
subjected to severe punishment. Duke Antony of Lorraine put down
the peasants in Alsace, Landgrave Philip of Hesse crushed the insurrection in his territory with bloody arms.

Meanwhile, however, Thomas Miinzer, operating from Miihlhausen, had incited the peasants of that district and also plunged some
cities (Erfurt, Nordhausen, and Eisenach) into the maelstrom of the
revolution. His movement was outspokenly communistic and re-

ligiously fanatical. It was more conspicuous for cruelty than the
other revolutionary movements in Germany. Miinzer soon met with
his fate. Philip of Hesse, the Elector John, and Dukes George and
Henry of Saxony, engaged his forces in a decisive battle near Frankenhausen on May 15, 1525, and defeated them. Three hundred captives,

including Miinzer, were executed. According to Cochlaeus and Landgrave Philip he died repentant and received the Viaticum in conform-

ity with the Catholic rite.

The great rebellion had been put down and Germany freed from
the danger of destruction. The condition of the peasantry became
more oppressive than before, while the power of the princes grew.

What attitude did Luther maintain towards the various phases of
the Peasants’ War?
“ExPrior to the commencement of hostilities, he published his
ves
entati
hortation to Peace.” He had been requested by certain repres
ve

lf on the T'wel
of the South German peasantry to express himse
acknowledging
Articles in the light of Holy Writ, # This he does by
ing on reconciliation and
the justice of some of the demands and insist
st the “opprespeace. However, he employs such violent terms again
the princes, “on whose neck
sion and extortion” of the authorities and
will break their necks,”
tion
sump
the sword lies,” and whose “pre
that the desire for revolution could be only strengthened among the

masses.

rned with the *“admonition” tha.t
In his “Exhortations” he is chiefly conce
peasants with meddling in his
the
es
charg
the Gospel be sustained. But he
pp. 269 5qq.
4 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 291 844:; Erlangen ed., Vol. XXIV,

2nd ed.,

282

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

project; you desire to assist the Gospel, he says, yet suppress it by your vio-

lent measures. For the rest, if the lords and princes “prohibit the preaching of

the Gospel and oppress the people so intolerably, they undoubtedly deserve
that God depose them from their thrones.” In imagination he already sees
the hands outstretched which are to execute the divine judgment. “Since,
therefore, it is certain,” he tells the princes, “that you govern tyrannically
and madly, forbid the Gospel and harass and oppress the poor, you have no

consolation nor hope except to be destroyed.

The tide of rebellion had already begun to rise in the district of
Mansfeld and in Thuringia when, at the end of April and the beginning of May, Luther left Eisleben and traveled about in the affected
districts, unsuccessfully endeavoring to stem the course of the rebel-

lion by his sermons. His journey impressed him with the seriousness
of the situation and the danger to his Gospel, nay, even to his life.
“At the risk of body and life,” he writes, “I passed through them. In
the case of the Thuringian peasants, I personally ascertained that the more
one warns and teaches them, the more stubborn, proud, and' furious they
wax.” ®
He described his journey to Dr. John Riihel, 2 counselor of Count Albert
of Mansfeld, in terms of great excitement, which dominated him for weeks
after the journey. He wrote that “the peasants, no matter how numerous,
are after all but robbers and murderers”; “that the devil had particularly
aimed at him and by all means wanted him to be dead.” He said that after
his return home he intended “to prepare himself for death,” but would not
approve of the deeds of these murderers. He is determined to defy them and
all his enemies to the utmost.
Towards the close of his letter, he mentions a particular act, which he is
prepared to perform in defiance of the devil: “If I can arrange it, I will, to
defy him, marry my Kate before I die, in case I hear that they continue.
I hope they shall not deprive me of my courage and joy.” ¢ This is the first
reference to a more intimate relationship existing between him and Catherine

of Bora, and to their contemplated marriage.

Luther returned to Wittenberg on May 6. Shortly after his arrival
he published a small pamphlet “Against the Murderous and Rapacious
Hordes of the Peasants,” which is a severe declaration of war against
the rebels. It is a demand permeated with the most ardent passion,
that the princes crush with inexorable might the rebels in their own
5 Kostlin-Kawerau, op. cit.,, Vol. I, p. 709.
% Erlangen ed., Vol. LIII, p. 294 (Briefwechsel, V, p. 164).

LUTHER AND THE PEASANTS WAR

283

blood. They [the rebellious peasants] “rob and rave and act like infuriated dogs. . . . Therefore, whosoever is able, should dash them
to pieces, strangle them, and stab them, secretly or openly, just as
one is compelled to kill 2 mad dog.” Just now, he says, a prince can
merit Heaven more effectively by shedding blood than by prayer.
He will not forbid the princes to strike at the rebels even “without
a previous offer of justice and fairness,” although an evangelical government should make use of this means. He advocates mercy only for
those who have been carried along by the revolutionary movement
involuntarily and under compulsion. Forthwith, however, he drowns

the plea of mercy by shouting: “Strangle them, whoso is able,” etc.
The existence of a strange tension in his mind is revealed in his
trembling reference to the proximate end of the world. “Perhaps,”
he says, “God intends to throw the world into a mass of confusion as
a preliminary to the day of Judgment.”

Shortly after his anxiety for the “mass of confusion” was relieved
by the victory of the princes, Luther composed a new pamphlet on
the death of Miinzer. It was written after the middle of May, and
entitled, “A Horrible Story and Judgment of God on Thomas Miin-

zer.” It is a refutation of the latter’s prophetical claims and, in addition, an apologia of Luther’s own Gospel, directed to his enemies in
the Anabaptist movement. In view of reports of shocking cruelties
perpetrated by the victors, he openly admonishes the princes “to be

merciful towards the prisoners and those who surrendered.” This
exhortation, however, was not sufficiently strong. Riihel, counselor to
the Count of Mansfeld, and many others, took offense at the excessive
punishment which Luther wished to inflict upon the guilty parties.

“Many of those who are friendly to you,” thus Rithel warns him on
May 26, “deem it strange that you permit the tyrants to strangle

their opponents without mercy. . . . It is necessary that you apologize for this.” Others reproachfully accused Luther of making himself a vassal of princes, because he approved and furthered their
bloody measures. Some apostatized from him, forgetting what, as

Luther complained, God had done for the world through him. The
author of the dreadful pamphlet “Against the Murderous PeasantsTM
snsisted with characteristic obstinacy upon his rights. The devil, he
contended, had possessed Miinzer and his hordes. “When the peasants
are seized by such a spirit, it is high time that they be strangulated
like mad dogs,” he writes to Riihel in defense of his attitude.

284

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

Meantime, however, he was not so indifferent as he pretended
to be towards the hostility that had arisen against him. A little while
Jater he published his “Circular Letter on the Severe Booklet against
the Peasants,” wherein he proposes to render an account of himself to
all “wiseacres who would teach him how he should write.”

“What I teach and write remains true, even though the whole world
should fall to pieces over it.” “I will not listen to any talk of mercy, but
will give heed to what the Word of God demands.”

With his wonted propensity to claim the victory, he repeats his former
exhortation: “Let him who is able, in whatsoever manner he can, cut and
thrust, strangle and strike at random, as if he were in the midst of mad
dogs.” “The ass wants to be beaten, and the mob wants to be ruled by force.”
With the aid of the mob, “the devil intended thoroughly to devastate
Germany, since he was unable to prevent in any other way the spread of the

evangel.” His Gospel was the guiding star of his conduct.
For the rest, Luther says he wrote only for the benefit of the authorities
who wished to conduct themselves either as Christians or as honest folks.
He hopes to be able to tell the truth “to the ferocious, raging, senseless
tyrants” later on.”
Apparently he was able to salve his conscience because of his participation
in the atrocities connected with the repulse of the Peasants’ revolt.
In later years he once said: “I, Martin Luther, have slain all the peasants
at the time of their rebellion; for, I commanded them to be killed; their
blood is upon me. But I cast it upon our Lord God; He commanded me to
speak as I did.”
Even in these horrible circumstances he relies upon his usual claim that he
is an instrument of God.

In addition to censuring his ferocity, the Catholics frankly reproved him for complicity in the disastrous war, which they attributed to his religious revolution and to his preachers, who had incited the people to rebellion. Cochlaeus and Emser pointed this out in
published writings. Erasmus, that acute observer of his age, also told
him that he was to blame. Ulric Zasius, a jurist, who at one time had
favored him, harbored the same conviction. 8 The author of a polemical work printed at Mayence accused Luther thus: “In your public writings, you declared that they were to assail the pope and the
cardinals with every weapon available, and wash their hands in their
blood. . . . You called those ‘dear children of God and true Chris7 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 208 sqq.
81bid., pp. 211 sq.

LUTHER AND THE PEASANTS WAR

285

tians,” who make every effort for the destruction of the bishoprics and
the extermination of episcopal rule. . . . You called the monasteries
dens of murderers, and incited the people to pull them down.” ® Other
fair-minded contemporaries held up before his eyes the difference
between the rather favorable opinion of the demands of the peasants
which he had entertained at the beginning of their uprising, and the
violent language in which he assailed them when he believed that his
gospel and position were jeopardized by the raging hurricane. They

maintained that the characterization of him as the newly risen vassal
of the princes was not without foundation.
At the present time even Protestant writers who are unacquainted with the
results of historical research, generally lament the unfortunate, nay, disastrous attitude which Luther maintained towards the origin and course
of the great social revolution. One of the most esteemed historians of this
phase of the Reformation, Fr. von Bezold, recalls Luther’s dangerous proclamation of Christian liberty and his criticism of the Catholic clergy. “How

else but in a material sense was the plain man to interpret Luther’s proclamation of Christian freedom and his extravagant strictures on the parsons and
nobles?” He reminds his readers of Luther’s mutinous assault upon the decree
of the diet of Nuremberg (1524) and of the impassioned invectives he
wrote against the “drunken and mad princes.” “Luther could not have
spoken thus,” he writes, “unless he was resolved to set himself up as the
lezder of a revolution.” He wonders “how he could expect the German

nation at that time to hearken to such inflaimmatory language from the
mouth of its ‘evangelist’ and ‘Elias’ and, nevertheless, to refuse to permit
themselves to be swept beyond the bounds of legality and order.” However,
like other historians who are favorable to Luther, Von Bezold sees an excuse
in the latter’s “ignorance of the ways of the world and the grandiose one-

sidedness,” which supposedly “attaches to an individual who is filled and
actuated exclusively by religious interests.”” 1¢

Genuine religious interests combined with political necessity re-

sulted, at the close of the German revolution, July 19, 1525, in the
formation of the League of Dessau, which was patterned after the
League of Ratisbon. Joachim of Brandenburg, Henry and Eric of
Brunswick, George of Saxony, and Albrecht of Mayence and Magde-

burg joined the new League. A report of the Duke of Saxony, who
9 Ibid., p. 190; cfr. Janssen-Pastor, Vol. II, 18th ed., p. 491.

10 Ipid., pp. 189 sq. from Bezold, Geschichte der deutschen Reformation, Berlin, 1890,

P. 447-

:

286

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

was the moving spirit of the League, designated as its object the
“extirpation of the root of the rebellion, namely, the damned

Lutheran sect,” on the ground that the revolt inspired by the Lutheran evangel “could hardly be quelled except by rooting out the
Lutherans.” ' At a convention held at Leipsic on Christmas day,
1525, the above-mentioned princes resolved to induce the Emperor

to furnish assistance in conformity with the decrees of Worms.
The spiritual estates who assembled at Mayence on November 14
of the same year also adopted a measure with a view to call the Emperor to Germany and to induce him to intervene. Twelve bishoprics
of the province of Mayence were represented at this meeting by
priests, while the bishops held aloof. When the resolutions taken at
Mayence became known to Luther, he attacked them in a pamphlet of
terrific vehemence, composed at the behest of the new Elector of
Saxony, but it was suppressed because of the intervention of Duke
George. 12

Now that the Catholics had taken a decisive position against the
new movement, certain princes who were sympathetic towards
Luther also formed an alliance. They had not accepted the invitation
extended to them after the suppression of the peasants’ uprising to
ally themselves with the other victorious princes for the sake of insuring tranquillity for the future. Philip I, the young and proficient
landgrave of Hesse, acted as one of the leaders of the new government. He formed an alliance at Gotha with the Elector John of

Saxony for the defense and advancement of the new movement and
later concluded the treaty of Torgau (May 2, 1526). The threats of
the Emperor were of no avail, but merely induced the dukes of
Brunswick-Liineburg and Philip of Brunswick-Grubenhagen, Henry

of Mecklenburg, Wolfgang of Anhalt, and Albrecht of Mansfeld to

join the Protestant alliance. So little had the Peasants’ War taught
men that salvation was not to be found in the disruption of the
fatherland. Instead of uniting their forces, they were bent upon
division.
Above all others Luther himself gave an unhappy example of internal dissension in his attitude towards the peasants. In his writings
he treats them as a class with contempt and hatred. The peasantry
11 1bid., p. 214.
121bid., p. 215. The document is printed in the Weimar ed. of Luther’s writings, pp.

aéo 8qq.

LUTHER AND THE PEASANTS WAR

287

repaid him for his attitude during the Peasants’ War by open animosity or indifference towards himself and his “gospel.” Luther’s
popularity with the lower classes declined perceptibly. When ill humor

was upon him, he could scarcely refrain from heaping insults upon the
peasants. 13
In his estimation they are “swine”; they are “all going to the devil”; they
are “not worthy of the many benefits and fruits which the earth yields.”

They have not given adequate support to the princes. “You powerless,
coarse peasants and asses, would that you were blasted by lightning! You
have the best of it, you have the marrow and yet are so ungrateful as to
refuse to give anything to the princes?” **

He went so far as to declare that it were best if serfdom and slavery were
revived.'®

According to a transcript of a sermon which he delivered in 1526, he
declared that the authorities are called by God “to drive, strike, suffocate,
hang, decapitate, break on the wheel the mob, so that they [i.e., the rulers]

may be feared.” As “swine and untamed beasts are driven and forced,” so
the rulers must insist upon obedience to their laws.*®

Luther zealously endeavored to gain the support of the high and
mighty beyond the circle of the princes and lords who were already

attached to his cause. In his desperate boldness he appealed by letter
to King Henry VIII of England, who at that time was still loyal to
the Catholic Church, requesting that he join him in the interests of
his gospel, after he had aspersed him with the basest calumnies. The
king sent a very humiliating reply, which was published together
with Luther’s letter. 17

" In a paroxysm of overwrought expectancy he even applied to Duke
George of Saxony, the most active of his opponents, “exhorting” him
“to accept the Word of God.” On December 22, 1525, he requested
the Duke in the humblest terms not to believe the flatterers and hypocrites who surrounded him and to desist from his ungracious resolve

of persecuting Luther’s teaching, which was certainly “the work of
God.” It was not “the same thing to fight against Minzer and
against Luther.” If it came to a test, this could be demonstrated by
13 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, pp. 216 sqq.; IV, pp. 210 5q9q.; VI, pp. 70 sqq.
14 [bid., VI, 73
15 1bid., Vol. 11, p. 217.
18 Jbid., p. 216.

*

17 Briefwechsel, V, pp. 231 sqq. On the reply (1526), ibid., p. 412.

288

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

the effects of his prayer against the Duke. “I regard my prayer an.d
that of my followers as more powerful than the devil himself, and. if
that were not true, things would long ago have gone differently with
Luther; even though people do not yet observe and notice the great

miracle which God has wrought in me.” 18

.

A few days later Luther received a reply from Duke George, which

showed him that his plea had failed to make an impression. **

In the very beginning of his reply, the Duke returns Luther’s complime:}t
concerning the flatterers and hypocrites by inviting him to look for them “in
those places where you are called a prophet, a Daniel, an apostle of the
Germans, an evangelist.” The prophets of old had “all been honest, truthful
and pious men,” whereas L. was an apostate, surrounded by apostates. He
(the Duke) would ever remain loyal to the Church, the rock of truth.
There is no new Gospel. Luther pretends to have “pulled it forth from under
the bench,” but “it were better if it had remained there; for if you bring
forth another such gospel we shall not retain a peasant [in Christendom].”
“Your fruits cause us to entertain a great horror and aversion for your

doctrine and gospels.” “When have more sacrileges been committed by consecrated persons than as a result of your gospel? When was there greater

spoliation of religious houses?” The severest censures are accumulated in the
Duke’s reply. Thus he reproaches Luther for having ‘‘slanderously and
scandalously” inveighed against the Roman emperor, “to whom we have
sworn allegiance”; for having revived all the errors of Hus and Wiclif and

despised the councils of the Church; and for having “produced by his doc-

trines blasphemy of the Holy Eucharist, the most precious gift of
God.” Regarding the comparison between Luther and Miinzer, he says, he
is well aware that Luther is not Miinzer, but “that God punished Miinzer

and his wickedness through us, should be a warning” to Luther. “We shall

gladly allow ourselves to be used for this purpose as an unworthy instrument
of God’s will.”

This unmistakable threat is supported by references to Luther’s activities

in Wittenberg. The Duke points out that Luther had established there an

asylum, a citadel for apostates, including such as belonged to his territory.
All monks and nuns “who despoil our churches and cloisters,” he says, “find

a refuge with you.” The wretchedness and misery of the fugitive nuns is
evident. “Were there ever more fugitive monks and nuns than are now at
Wittenberg? When were wives taken away from their husbands and given

to others, as is now the case under your gospel? When has adultery been
more frequent than since you have written: when a wife cannot become a
18 Erl. ed., Vol. LIII, pp. 338 (Briefwechsel, V, p. 281).
19 Briefwechsel, V, pp. 285 sqq. (December 28).

LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

289

mother by her husband, she shall go to another and bear offspring, which the
husband is obliged to support?”” 2° Lastly, Duke George mentions Luther’s
marriage, which had but recently taken place. The devil, he declares, has
seduced him through the sting of the flesh. He should have recourse to prayer,
in order to free himself from the spell of Eve, who deceived him. If you

were able to get along without a wife for a time in order to please man,
why are you unable to do so for God’s sake? . . . Prostrate yourself at the
feet of Christ, “then, by the grace of God, the monk shall be relieved of the
nun.” The writer recalls the judgment of God, “to whom you both have
made a vow” to refrain from unchastity. On his part, he promises to par-

don all the injuries inflicted upon him and volunteers to intercede for Luther
“with our most gracious Lord, the Emperor,” if he will return to his duty
and to the Church.
2. LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

The tempestuous year, 1525, as we have seen, was a profoundly
stormy one also in Luther’s interior life. We have sketched the convulsions into which he was thrown by the peasants’ revolt. In addition to this, he was overwhelmed with labor in virtue of his leadership of a new religion. Besides, there were the increasing worries
about the durability of the work he had undertaken, and the increase

in the so-called temptations which he habitually attributed to the
'
devil.
During that period, Melanchthon, too, was oppressed by worry

and lack of sleep; nay, “brought to the brink of the grave.” But

none of Luther’s friends suffered as he did in consequence of the
state of fear through which he passed. His correspondence of 1525,
especially with Spalatin, reflects these painful struggles. “How does
Satan rage,” he groans; “how he rages everywhere against the

Word.” 2! Again he laments: “Satan is enraged against Christ, because he has discovered Him to be the stronger.” “The rage of Satan,”
he says, “‘is not the least significant sign that the end of the ?vorld is
approaching.” “Of these there are greater signs than many belleYe.” &

It is astounding that the condition of physical exhaustion which he
had experienced shortly before, was not more frequently repeat.ed.
Mention was made of the fact that he had once been found lying
20 Cf. Erl. ed., Vol. XVI, 2nd ed., pp. 513 sq.

21 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1I, pp. 167 sq.
22 1bid., p. 168,

290

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

stretched out on the floor unconscious. He had been overcome by
“melancholy and sadness,” coupled with incapacity to digest his food.
In 1523 he suffered from a peculiar indisposition. Fever and insomnia were among the symptoms. Johann Eberlin (Apriolus), a

renegade Franciscan, and John Magenbuch, a student of medicine at
Wittenberg at that time, attended the patient. When his condition

had improved, Eberlin sent a detailed account of the sickness, coupled

with a request for advice, to his friend Wolfgang Rychard at Ulm,
a physician who was personally acquainted with Luther. The account
is no longer extant, but the Latin reply addressed to Magenbuch was
published by the Protestant historian, Theodore Kolde. It first mentions the necessity of curing Luther’s insomnia, calling him the new
Elias of whom Eberlin had written, “among other things,” that “it
is not to be marveled at that a man who, like master Elias, is overwhelmed with so much intellectual labor, should experience dryness

of the brain and lose sleep as a consequence.” A poultice composed of

women’s milk and violet oil was to be applied to the patient’s head.
Then the letter continues: “If the pains of the French sickness disturb his sleep, they may be alleviated by means of a poultice made of
the marrow of a stag, mixed with earth-worms, and boiled with some
saffron and quicksilver( vinum sublimatum). This, if applied on retiring, will induce sleep.” 22 These odd remedies are in conformity with
the state of medical science at that period. But attention has been attracted by the passage referring to the French sickness. The malum
Franciae is notoriously syphilis. That Luther was a victim of this dis-

ease is not confirmed by any other source, whereas it is known, on the
other hand, that this disease spread over Europe from France and

Spain as a kind of pestilence at that time. It was also well known from

experience that sexual intercourse was not the only means by which
venereal diseases could be contracted.

Oppressed by interior afflictions, Luther in March, 1525, wrote a
letter to his intimate friend Amsdorf at Madgeburg, beseeching him

to come in haste to Wittenberg, in order to aid him “with consolation-

and friendly services,” since he was “very melancholy and much
tempted.” The captain of the garrison, Hans von Metzsch, also desired his help because of the troubled state of his mind. 2* No other
23 1bid., p. 163: *. . . et si cum hoc dolores mali Francie somno impedimento fuerint,

mitigandi sunt cum emplastro, quod fit ex medulla cervi etc.
24 Ibid., p. 169.

:

LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

291

details have come down to us. In the case of Metzsch, who was a
bachelor, it is highly probable that there was question of interior
conditions, such as afflicted him four years later, when Luther urged
him to marry forthwith, and hence, it has been assumed by Protestants that Luther’s temptations were of the same kind. 2° It was, indeed, related to the serious question of his marriage, which had not
as yet been solved at that time.
Although he vigorously recommended marriage to others, even to
priests and religious, Luther long resisted the idea of taking a wife
unto himself. He feared that such a step would injure his personal
reputation and that of his gospel. He foresaw that his opponents
would avail themselves of his marriage to launch a more vigorous

and successful attack upon him. “We are the spectacle of the world”
(speculum mundi sumus), was the phrase he used in 1521.%¢ Later he
said: “The devil keeps a sharp eye on me, in order to render my
teaching of bad repute or to attach some shameful stain to it.” ?* He

knew, moreover—and this helped to decide the issue—that the Elector
Frederick, solicitous about conserving the old conditions as much as
possible, did not favor the marriage of priests and monks. It is possible also that he was restrained by those moral considerations and
qualms of conscience which still survived in him, and at times asserted themselves with tempestuous vigor, since his monastic days,
when he had lived in conformity with his sacred vows.
Among others, Spalatin and Amsdorf actively promoted Luther’s
marriage. On November 24, 1524, he still wrote that he had no in-

clination to matrimony, but it appears that only a few months afterwards he was ruled by other sentiments. 28 It is quite characteristic
of him that these sentiments triumphed at the very height of the
Peasants’ War, in the days when he was subjected to the greatest

mental stress, when he feared that he was destined to die and his
work to perish. His titanic nature required a reaction against the
devil. Marriage was to furnish this reaction in spite of all the powers
of hell and the papacy. His announcement to the counselor of Mans-

feld, Riihel, under date of May 4, 1525, referring to “his Katy” and
the defiance of the devil, says enough. There are on record other vigorous and defiant declarations relative to his marriage, such as the
25 Jbid., p. 169. Cfr. Késtlin-Kawerau, M. Lutl{er, Vol. 1, pp. 796 and 729, note 2.
268 y Cor. IV, 9; cf. Briefwechsel, V, p. 218.

27 1bid., p. 134.
28 1bid., p. 139.

292

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

announcement that he was in duty bound to proclaim by his example the value of the married state in the eyes of the world. These
declarations were intended to conceal from himself and others the

fact that, in the last analysis, the force of nature, which he did not
restrain by prayer, impelled him to break the solemn vow he had made.
According to Melanchthon’s testimony, Luther entered into too
frequent and close relations with the fugitive nuns who had come

to Wittenberg. It should be remembered that some of them found

lodging with different families in the city, while others found a temporary refuge in Luther’s monastery.

In his oral intercourse with people, Luther exercised an even greater
freedom of speech than in his writings. He indulged in unbecoming
jokes. On Easter, 1525, he jokingly wrote to Spalatin that he himself

was a “famous lover” and had set him an example; for he had had
three wives on his hands at one time, of whom he had lost two and
was scarcely able to keep hold of the third; that it was really astonishing that he had not become a woman long ago, since he had written
so often about marriage, and had so much to do with women (misceor
feminis). 2® The three wives appear to be the three women whom
common report had designated as likely to wed Luther.
In the pious style of this letter he described his actual marriage as
entirely dependent on the will and direction of God. “Take care lest
I do not precede you in marriage, for God is wont to bring to pass

what we least expect.”” In a similar vein he wrote to an inquisitive
lady, Argula von Staufen, who inquired about his intentions concerning marriage as early as November, 1524. He told her that he was

“in the hands of God, as a creature whose heart He could fashion as

He would”; his feelings were yet foreign to matrimony; “but I shall
neither set bounds to God’s operation in my regard, nor listen to my

own heart.” 8 Mystical thoughts even in this slippery field. His enemies speak without mysticism. He knows it: “Alas, poor monk, how
he must feel the weight of his cowl, how pleased he would be to have
a wife”’—thus Luther, while he still sojourned at the Wartburg, heard

in spirit his Catholic opponents speak against him and his whole undertaking.?!
These scruples were finally overcome by his peculiar mentality,
29 Briefwechsel, V, p. 157, April 16, 1525. Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 140.
80 Ibid., p. 173.

81 1bid., p. 87.

LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

293

“through the operation of God.” In a letter dated June 2, 1525, he
frankly and freely requested Dr. Riihel to tell the Cardinal of Mayence: “Should my marriage fortify His Grace, I am quite willing to
trot on ahead of him by way of example, since it is my intention anyway, before I depart this life, to be in the state of matrimony, which
I regard as demanded by God, even if it be nothing more than an
espousal or Joseph’s marriage.” If the Elector desired to know more

about the reason why he had deferred his marriage (thus he writes
somewhat obscurely to Riihel), tell him “that I have always feared
that I was not fit for it.” 32 Is it necessary to connect the Joseph’s

marriage with this unfitness? “Scandal for scandal, necessity breaks
even iron and gives no scandal,”—thus he had exclaimed in his published invitation to the nuns to break their solemn vow of chastity. *3

“The desire to be pure”—thus runs another phrase taken from the
very heart of his dogmatic system—'‘may not be brought about by
good works, but the birth of Christ must be renewed within us by

means of faith. . . . Sin is incapable of injuring me; the force of

sin has been spent. We adhere to Him who has vanquished sin.” “In

sum, despite good works, everything depends upon doctrine and
faith.” 3 The Catholic view of the matter is that the marriage which
he contemplated was not only a shameful sacrilege, but, in addition,
invalid because of the sacred vow of chastity made by Luther and
its solemn acceptance on the part of the Church.
The flames of the Peasants’ Uprising were still ablaze in the back-

ground of his mind. The news of the bloody punishment inflicted by
the victorious princes harrowed the souls of thousands, but it did
not deter Luther from enacting the scene of his marriage before the
eyes of the world. On the contrary, the horrors of the age, as we saw,

helped to mature his resolution to wed.

His choice fell upon one of the ex-nuns who had left the convent,

he
2 circumstance which, in the eyes of Catholics, invested the step
herself

took with the character of a grave scandal. Catherine von Bora

186). On the last passage Enders re82 Efl, ed., Vol. LIII, p. 308 (Briefwechsel, V,top.establis
h whether Albrecht ever enterpossible
hardly
is
it
date
marks: “At this late
the grand master.” As late as
relative,
his
of
tained the idea of following the example
gold gulden to Catherine Bora.
1525, after Luther’s marriage, he sent a present ofover20 the
peasants at Konigshofen was
Kostlin-Kawerau, I, p. 738.—The decisive victory
gained on the same day on which Luther promised to “‘trot on ahead.”
88 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1I, p. 143.

34 I1bid., p. 148.

294

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

had been very active in the prosecution of her choice.?* She spurned
other alliances which were open to her. Her mind was set upon higher
aims. Either Luther or Amsdorf, she said, would be her husband. She
understood how to influence Luther with female artfulness. With

her chubby face she was not exactly a striking beauty, but she was
endowed with great prudence, energy, and a facile tongue. Luther
afterwards said that he had always observed signs of pride about her
and pretended that he had not married her for love. 2% She gave
promise of becoming an industrious and devoted housewife. In gen-

eral she satisfied this expectation without any particular display of
intellect. The rumors which had arisen to the effect that Luther had

had sexual relations with her prior to their marriage are unproved
and can be satisfactorily accounted for by the habitual freedom with
which he mingled in society and also, partly, by the haste with which
he married.
The wedding took place at his home, in the evening of June 13,
as the result of a sudden resolve on Luther’s part and without the
previous knowledge of most of his friends. Bugenhagen, Jonas, Lucas
Cranach and his wife, and the jurist Doctor Apel were the only witnesses. Bugenhagen seems to have officiated in his capacity of minister. A public wedding followed on June 27, in which a number of
invited guests participated, comformably with the custom that pre-

vailed in those parts.
In one of the first epistolary comments on his marriage, Luther
again voices the sentiment with which he had overcome his principal

scruple: “I have become so low and despicable by this marriage,” he

says jokingly, “that I hope the angels will laugh and all the devils
weep.” Thereby, he says, he had “condemned and challenged the judgment of those who in their ignorance resist things divine.” 37 This
remark was aimed at his lawyer friend, Jerome Schurf, who had said:
“If this monk takes a wife, all the world and the devil himself will
laugh, and Luther will undo the whole of his previous work.” 38
Schurf afterwards relented somewhat. The jurists generally, how35 Cf. Kroker, Lutherstudien, Weimar, 1917, pp. 140 sqq. According to this Protestant
writer, Catherine’s interview with Amsdorf as mediator, contained in a Vienna manuscript,
is quite credible.
38 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 185,

37 Ibid., p. 175.
38 1bid,, p. 176.

LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

295

ever, supported by canon law, raised objections to the marriage. 2°
Luther, on the contrary, repeatedly indulged in such assurances
as: “God willed it”; “the Lord plunged me suddenly into matrimony,
while I still clung to quite other views.” ° Jonas, one of the witnesses

present on June 13, forces himself to use similar language, although
his sentiments were divided. “I do not know,” he says, “what strong
emotion stirred my soul; now that it has taken place and is the will of
God, I wish [them] every happiness.” 4* The chief reason for the unprecedented haste was the growth of slanderous rumors. Bugenhagen

testifies to this fact with unconcealed discomfiture, when he states that
evil tales constrained Luther to marry so unexpectedly. Luther himself announces his marriage to his friend Spalatin in these significant
words: “I have shut the mouths of those who slandered me and
|

Catherine von Bora.” %2

For the rest, he is not deficient in adducing reasons for his marriage,

but on the contrary, quite resourceful. Beside the law of nature, he
mentions the will of God as revealed to him, and the malice of his
slanderers. In addition there is the motive that, prior to his imagined
assassination, which he believed to foresee in this period of storm and
stress, he was bound to “defy the devil” because the latter was causing the world to apostatize from him. ** Moreover, he was under obligation to annoy and irritate his papistical opponents, “to make them
still madder and more foolish” before the end of the world. He like-

wise felt bound to show obedience to his father, who at one time
wanted him to marry. Finally, and as a seventh reason, he was obliged
to “have pity” on poor, abandoned Catherine.

A peculiar impression is created by the pleasantries in which he
indulges and to which he gives utterance in proportion as the voices
of the critics grow louder, even in the ranks of his followers. Thus
he writes to his friend Leonard Koppe that he is now “entwined in the
meshes of his mistress’ tresses.” Elsewhere he speaks of the thoughts
which come to a man when he sees “two tresses of plaited hair” next

to himself upon awakening. ¢ Writing to his friend Link, he attempts an indelicate pun on the name of Bora, which sounds like
39 Erl, ed., Vol. LV, p. 157 (Briefwechsel, XI, p. 90).

40 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 175.
41 J1bid., p. 174.

42 [bid., p. 175.

43 1bid., pp. 181 sq.

!

44 Kstlin-Kawerau, I, pp. 738 sq.; cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 183,

296

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

bier, thus: “I lie on the bier [Bore = modern German, Babre], i.e.,

I am dead to the world. My ‘Catena’ [Kette or chain] rattles her
greetings to you and to your Catena (cafera meaning chain, hence
Katie).” ** A mannish demeanor, which he perforce observes in his
wife, frequently causes him to indulge in a jocose interchange of
“Kate” with “Kette” (chain). In the invitation to the public marriage celebration he styles her his “Herr Caterin.” Afterwards he
frequently calls her his “Herr” (Lord), “Herr Moses,” or ‘“Most
Holy Doctoress.” 46
His indelicate jests concerning his marriage and the reasons by

which he sought to justify it, were of no avail to him in face of

the numerous, unpleasant criticisms to which he was subjected. At
Wittenberg, those who thought unfavorably of the marriage did
their utmost to relay to him every damaging report. The Frankfurt
patrician Hamman von Holzhausen wrote as follows to his son Justinian, a student at the University of Wittenberg: “I have read your
letter telling me that Martinus Lutherus has entered the conjugal
state; I fear he will be evil spoken of and that it may cause him a great
secession,” 47
Yet, despite his jocularity, Luther was “sad and uneasy,” as Melanchthon says. The latter was filled with bitter indignation. Cautious as he was, he did not express himself openly, but in a Greek
letter to his friend Joachim Camerarius he unreservedly revealed his
sentiments, or rather the chagrin which struggled within him against

his devoted, almost servile demeanor toward the person of Luther.
Without reserve he points to the occasion of the misfortune.*®

In this letter of June 16, 1525, Melanchthon complains, in the first place,
that Luther “had not consulted any of his friends beforehand.” “Perhaps

you will be surprised,” he continues, “that at this unhappy time, when upright and right-thinking men everywhere are being oppressed, he is not

suffering, but, to all appearance, leads a more easy life (uaAlov Tovpav)
and endangers his reputation, notwithstanding the fact that the German
nation stands in need of all his wisdom and strength. It appears to me

this is how it happened: The man is approachable in the highest degree,

that

and

45 1bid., p. 184.
48 1bid., Vol. V, p. 309.
47 1bid., Vol. 11, p. 184.
48 The whole Greek text of the letter in Grisar, Luther, Vol.
1I, pp. 176 sq., note 3.

Cfr.

the quotation from Jerome Dungersheim, ibid., pP.
145. Melanchthon was
agreeable to Luther and the latter’s nearest friends in referring
to the marriage.

more

LUTHER’S MARRIAGE

297

the nuns who waylaid him with all their snares, have attracted him to themselves. Perhaps his frequent association with them, although he is noble and
high-minded, has rendered him effeminate or has inflamed him. In this way it
appears that he has come to grief in consequence of the untimely change in
his mode of life. It is clear, however, that there is no truth in the gossip that
he had previously had illicit intercourse with her [Bora]. Now the thing is

done, it is useless to find fault with it, for I believe that nature impels man
to matrimony. Even though his life is low, yet it is holy and more pleasing

to God than the unmarried state. And since I see that Luther is to some ex-

tent sad and troubled about this change in his way of life, I seek very
earnestly to encourage him by representing to him that he has done nothing
which, in my opinion, can be made a subject of reproach to him.”
Concerning Luther’s “having come to grief,” the writer finds consolation,
first, in the fact that advancement and honor are dangerous to all men, even
to those who fear God, as Luther does, and, secondly, in the hope that Lu-

ther’s new state of life may teach him greater dignity, so that he may lay
aside the buffoonery (or mania for making ribald jests, Bwpmoloxia), for

which we have so often found fault with him. Camerarius, therefore, should
not allow himself to be disconcerted, even though he may feel painfully
aggrieved. “Through frequent mistakes of the saints of old God has shown
us that He wishes us to prove His Word, and not to rely upon the reputation

of any man, but only His Word. He would be a very godless man indeed,
who, on account of the mistake of the doctor, should judge slightingly of

his doctrine.”

These forced reflections rather reveal the timid, learned humanist
than the open-minded man, let alone the theologian. Melanchthon’s
displeasure, moreover, may have been increased by the domestic
strain that existed between his middle-class wife and Catherine von

Bora, who was of noble descent. When Camerarius later on edited
the collected letters of Melanchthon, he had the original of the
above letter before him, but did not dare to print it as it was, but

suppressed some passages and falsified others. The genuine text was

not made known until 1876, when it was published by A. Druffel

according to the original holograph in the Chigi Library at Rome.
The falsified text, however, was incorporated. in the Corpus Re-

formatorum (1834), a work which has been frequently used up to
the present time.

The newly married couple made their home in the former Augus-

tinian monastery at Wittenberg. Elector John relinquished the onetime abode of the monks, which Luther had tumed over to him,

298

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

to be used by him and his relatives as a residence. Catherine converted the monastic cells into rooms for the students who became
her boarders and thereby helped to increase her modest income.
With little consideration the entire furnishings of the monastery,
including the plates, yea, even pious memorials such as the drinking
glass of St. Elizabeth, were turned to profane uses.*® As master of
the house, Luther gradually’ forgot the sadness and malaise concerning the change in his mode of life, which Melanchthon referred to.
The restless activity with which he continued his literary labors
also helped to divert his mind completely at times from his qualms
of conscience.
3. LUTHER’S PRINCIPAL WORK: ON THE ENSLAVED WILL

Mention has already beéen made of Luther’s impassioned work,
“Against the Heavenly Prophets,” which appeared in the beginning
of 1525. In a pamphlet boiling with indignation he attacked, about
the same time, the two Bulls of Clement VII on the ecclesiastical
Jubilee of 1525. Now comes Antichrist again, he writes, with his
putrid, reeking, mendacious indulgence-wares, which have long ago
been derided by mankind. Germany in the end will fare worse
than Jerusalem.®® He had two “Sermons” printed in order to take the
field against the framing of new ecclesiastical ordinances: marriage,
the laying aside of the religious habit, the eating of flesh meat and
similar matters must not be subject to the tyranny of the pope.’!
An illustrated satire, published by him in the beginning of 1526,
was entitled: “The Papacy Described and Depicted in its Members.”
In this work the secular and regular clergy appear in their habits
and are ridiculed in verse. In the introduction Luther says that there
is by far not enough of such derision; that kings and princes had
flirted with the papal harlot and still indulged in this practice. It

is necessary, according to the Apocalypse of St. John (XVII, 1 sqq.),
to fill her cup until she lies crushed like dirt in the street, and until

there is nothing more despicable than this Jezabel.52 This he en-

4% Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 313 sqq.
50 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 255 8qq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIX, p. 297.
51 Késtlin-Kawerau, II, p. 141; Weimar ed., Vol. XV, pP. 571 sqq.; 609
sqq.; Erl. ed.,
Vol. XVII, 2nd ed., pp. 223 sqq.
52 Weimar ed., Vol. XIX, pp. 7 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXIX, pp. 359 sqq.; cfr. Grisar-Heege,
Luthers Kampfbilder 3 (Lutherstudien, n. $)s PP. 24—37, with illustrations.

LUTHER ON THE ENSLAVED WILL

299

deavored to do to the best of his ability in many passages of the
second part of the Kirchenpostille, which he had printed at the
end of 1525.

Besides the works mentioned and those which Luther wrote during 1525, especially against the peasants, he now published his ex-

haustive treatise “On the Enslaved Will” (De Servo Arbitrio).>

According to his own statement, it excels all his other works in
importance and is devoted to the principal doctrine and corner-

stone of his system.

This Latin work was intended to convey to all countries his
defense against Erasmus’s attack in the matter of free-will and
grace and to demonstrate man’s absolute inability to do good. For
a long time he had hesitated to engage in an encounter with the
~ great humanist. The pleas of his wife, as he himself confessed at a

later period, finally determined him to tackle the task. True, theology
was a rather indifferent matter to Catherine, indeed, it was beyond
her ken; but she could not tolerate the reproach that Luther was
unable to reply.5* With bitter chagrin she had heard of the triumphs
of his adversaries, and that the many humanistic admirers of Erasmus
would apostatize from the new “gospel.” When Luther began to

write his reply, in the second half of 1525, he felt, as he himself
expressed it, as if a knife had been placed at his throat by Erasmus.’
As far as he himself was concerned, he was now resolved to strangle
the doctrine of free-will and all its representatives, and to demon-

strate that man can do no good without the co-operation of nGod.
and
He produced a work full of contradictions, marked by passio
with
ary
advers
the
worst
to
vors
irritability, a work which endea
erpreted
extremes. He not only divests man, by numerous misint
what is
ng
choosi
and
ning
discer
for
Biblical passages, of his capacity
not
does
God
if
good,
lly
natura
y
good, including even the purel
will;
and
ct
intelle
n
huma
the
for
substitute his omnipotent efficacy
everything is absolutely
but in Luther’s eager desire for combat the
sole activity of God.
to
subordinated to a blind fate, subject

d controversy, then all
If God foreknows all things, which is beyon
things must happen by necessity, and He must be the inevitable cause
Opp- Lat. Var., VII, pp. 113 sqq. For detailed
53 Weimar ed., Vol. XVIII, pp. 600 sqq.;
Luther, Vol. 11, pp. 223 sqq.

information on this work, cfr. Grisar,
54 Grisar, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 264.

'

55 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 659.

300

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

of all. God brings everything to pass even where there is no question
of the influence of grace for the salvation of man (citra gratiam).
“Whatever God has made,” he says, ‘“He moves, impels, and urges forward
(movet, agit, rapit)

with the force of His omnipotence, which none can

escape or alter; all must yield compliance and obedience according to the
power conferred on them by God. God in particular moves the will “‘by means

of His omnipotence, in consequence of which man necessarily entertains this

or that desire, as God gives it to him, and as He forcibly impels it with His
movement (rapit). . . . Whether good or bad, every volition is driven by

force to wish and to act.” * Luther in other passages conceded the existence

of free-will “in inferior matters,” but not in respect of the good, which is a

contradiction. He himself shows that he “in reality does not wish to be
exactly understood in the sense of this restriction.” 7

With the same intensity he assumes the domination of the devil in the
realm of morals, but he was not sufficiently concerned with the compatibility
of the sovereign authority of God on the one hand and the activity of the
devil on the other. “If we believe”—these words of his can be read only with

anguish of heart—"if we believe that Satan is the prince of this world, who

constantly attacks the Kingdom of Christ with all his might and never

releases the human beings he has enslaved without being forced to do so by the

power of the Spirit of God, then it is clear that there can be no free-will.” 58
Either God or Satan rules mankind. This is his favorite idea, which destroys

free-will, the noblest gift of our nature. “The case is simply thus,” he resolutely writes; “if God is within us, the devil is not there and we can only
desire what is good. But if God is absent, the devil is present, and then we
can desire only what is evil.”

“The human will,” he continues with a figure of speech which has become
famous, “‘stands like a saddle-horse between the twe. If God mounts into
the saddle, man wills and goes forward as God wills. . . . But if the devil

is the horseman, then man wills and acts as the devil wills. He has no power

to run to one or the other of the two riders and offer himself to
him, but

the riders fight to obtain possession of the animal.” 5°

With a horrible temerity Luther declares this viewpoint to be
the essence and kernel of religion. It is his opinion that, without
it, the dogma of the Redemption falls, since with free-will Christ

would lose His unique an%minent significance, human works would
56 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 265. "

57 1bid,

58 1bid., p. 273.
M 1bid., p. 374

1

LUTHER ON THE ENSLAVED WILL

301

prevail, and self-righteousness, Pharisaism, and hypocrisy would occupy the place of self-effacing humility.

Thus he leads his readers back to the pseudomystical errors whence

his entire system of theology sprang.

Protestant investigators, who generally display annoyance at these
propositions, incidentally and briefly touch upon the question whether
this “form of piety is not to be judged pathologically.” 8 The

pseudomystical traces and many of the details concerning the mental
constitution of the youthful Luther, which have been heretofore
adduced, furnish an affirmative reply to this question. Thus the

Protestant theologian Kattenbusch describes Luther’s frame of mind
ously
when he composed the latter work, as “not normal” nor “religi
of
idea”
mental
“funda
the
of
speaks
healthy.” 8 And Otto Scheel
?
mind.%
of
frame
d
morbi
a
of
ct
produ
the
the “De Servo Arbitrio” as
edly
repeat
soul
’s
Luther
of
state
d
morbi
‘As a matter of fact, the
on of the
breaks forth in this book. He realizes that the predestinati
that
states
He
ll.
free-wi
of
denial
his
damned is an inference from
r,”
despai
of
verge
the
at
ed
“arriv
and
it
he often took grave offense at

born.” But a marvelous
so much so that he “wished he had never beenized
“how salutary and
recogn
He
change had come over his ideas.
er shares the
whoev
for
was”;
y
how near to grace this despondenc
God, choses
of
will
the
upon
dent
conviction that all things are depen
ts God
expec
only
but
lf,
himse
nothing for himself in despairing of

and strangled in
to act. He is next to salvation, although he be deadually
immersed in
spirit
and
consequence of his consciousness of guilt,
s of Christ
merit
the
that
belief
hell. Such a one is succored by the
is justified
man
that
ction
convi
cover his sins, the sola fides, i. e., the
has read
who
one
every
to
ar
by faith alone. “This,” he says, “is famili
our works.” %

out
This doctrine of determinism, like his whole system, grew
mental

of personal motives and was patterned after his own abnormal
states.

far as to idolize the consolation
In his acrobatic exposition he even goes so ill:
out this doctrine I
which he derives from his denial of free-w uncer“With
y and compelled to
taint
believe I would be constantly tortured by
60 Julius Kostling cfr. Grisar, Luther, Yol. II, p. 274.

61 Jbid., p. 284.
82 1bid., p. 284,

M 1bid., p. 279.

302

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

expunge all my work. My conscience would never enjoy certain ease. . . .

If free-will were offered to me, I would not accept it at all. I would not
want anything to be placed within my power, so as to give a practical proof
of my salvation, because I would nevertheless fear that I could not withstand

the spiritual dangers and the attacks of so many devils.” &
He arbitrarily conceals from himself predestination to hell with its horrors,
but firmly insists upon the monstrosity of the absolute predestination to
eternal punishment of human beings who could not act otherwise than they

did. He suggests that we simply should not think of it! He has recourse to a
mysterious bidden God, who, in His unlimited majesty, may have other
norms that our human sense of justice can devise. The essence of God is truly

inscrutable. The statement in the Apocalypse that God wills the salvation of
all men, applies to the Deus revelatus in the Gospel of Christ; but there
also exists a hidden God, a Deus absconditus, whose decrees may be quite
different.

Relative to these doctrines, the Protestant theologian Kattenbusch, whom
we have already quoted, says: “Luther expressly advances it as a theory that

God has two contradictory wills, the secret will of which no one knows anything, and another which He causes to be proclaimed; . . . in other words,
that He is free to lie.” ®® No less frank are the words of another Protestant

theologian, A. Taube: From Luther’s statements we must “conclude that God,

as He is preached [in Sacred Scripture], is not in every instance the same
God as He who actually works, and that in some cases in His revelation He

says what is quite untrue.” ® It cannot be denied that Luther, led astray by
Ockham’s theory of an arbitrary God, introduced a new concept of God,
which, however, is forthwith disproved by the inference just described.

Now, while he upholds, by means of his Deus absconditus, the absolute

predestination to hell of every man as a possibility, and while he represents it

as an actuality in the case of such as are already damned, he does not wish
this subject to be made a topic of reflexion and discussion. It is a point which
he emphasized innumerable times in his books and letters. As a means
of preventing despair he recommends, in an almost importunate manner,

that no

84 1bid., pp. 268 sq.
5 Kattenbusch, “Deus absconditus bei Luther,” in
the Kaftanfestschrift, pp. 170 sqq.
Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 169, note 1.—Isaias (45, 1 5) praises
the Deus absconditus, but as
God of mercy who wills to save all men. Thus in
verse 19, according to Luther’s own
translation: “I have not said in vain to the seed of Jacob:
Seek me.” Cf. verses 22 and 24.

—R. Otto (Das Heilige, 7th ed., Breslau, 1922)
says

(p. 118): Luther flees from the Deus

absconditus “like a badger into the fissures of a rock,”
and (p. 120), owing to his personal
states of fear he reduces the whole of Christianity to
fiduciary faith. According to Scheel,
Luther with his iustitia passiva, introduces a “completel
y new theory of God.” (Article,
“lustitia Passiva” in the Briegerfestschrift. Cf. Grisar
in the Zeitschrift fir katholische

Theologie, Vol. XLII, 1918, p. 599.
68 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 269. Cfr. ibid., p. 263.

LUTHER ON THE ENSLAVED WILL

‘

303

thought be given to predestination; God, the Incomprehensible, must be
adored in silent submission. In his practical work, on the other hand, he frequently writes as though man’s salvation lay solely within his own power, by
co-operating with divine grace. Thus involuntarily he returns to the Catholic
doctrine.

There is no fundamental distinction in the dismal doctrine of
predestination as taught by Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli, except
that the latter two, particularly Calvin, are more systematic in their

exposition of it. Késtlin, the biographer of Luther, is constrained
to concede this when he says: “In the resoluteness with which Luther
accepts the most rigorous consequences of the doctrine of predestination he is essentially one with Zwingli and Calvin, the other leaders

of the Reformation.” ¢

Luther appeals to the authority of St. Augustine, that famous
Doctor of the Church, in confirmation of his doctrine. But he
wofully distorts Augustine’s utterances and merely asserts without

proof: “He is on my side.” %8

Luther never abandoned his position relative to determinism and
predestination, though he modified his expressions. He characterized
his book “De Servo Arbitrio,” while still in its formative stage, as

a “thunderbolt” against the Erasmic and popish heresy of freewill,% and always regarded it as a work which his opponents “shall
"® “I do not recognize any
not be able to refute in all eternity.”
as late as 1537 to Capito,
writes
he
genuine,”
as
writings
of my
the Catechism.” He says
and
Will
Enslaved
the
on
“except those
be lost.TM
should
others
the
if
tears
any
he would not shed

It is incomprehensible that some Protestant theologians extol the

deeply religious spirit which is supposed to prevail in the “De Servo
Arbitrio.” 72 They admire its profound humility in the presence

of God’s omnipotence and the self-annihiliation that pulsates
throughout the book. But they do not reflect that the motto of the
unfortunate treatise is not true humility, but the suicide of human
nature. In his preface to the new critical edition, the Weimar editor
styles the “De Servo Arbitrio” *“the most splendid Latin and perhaps
67 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. 1, p. 664.

68 1bid.

69 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 284.

70 1bid., p. 291.
71 1bid., p. 292.

J

72 Ibid., pp. 292 sq.; cfr. Vol. VI, pp. 452 sq.

304

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

the most splendid polemical work of Luther,” ?® but adds: “It must
not be concealed that the whole conception has a strongly pantheistic
and mechanistic appearance.” 74

7/ Luther’s attitude towards the Commandments of God also aroused

strong opposition. If man is not free to observe the Commandments,
why should there be any at all, and why should punishment be

threatened for those who despise them? In consequence of this and

other writings of Luther, many placed themselves beyond the Commandments. “Let us do as we please.” 7® Luther strongly opposes
this tendency. But his defense of the Commandments consists in
this: God gives His commandments with the wise intention of teaching us how little we can do of our own accord. The law and its
threats should arouse within us a sense of our incompetence, enkindle a desire for redemption by grace, and thus lead us to salvation through self-annihilation. ,
The assertion of God’s relation to sin was equally unintelligible
to many readers of Luther’s treatise.
If man lacks free-will, who is it that causes sin? Luther feels that it will
not do to hold God directly responsible for sin. He does not assert that there
is an immediate impulse to evil originating with God. But, quite consistently

with his system, he speaks of the treachery of Judas thus: “His [Judas’]
will was the work of God; God by His almighty power moved his will as He
does all that is in this world.” " He holds that Adam, at least in spirit, was
abandoned by God in Paradise and placed in a situation in which he could
not but fall.
“He is God,” says Luther, “and therefore there is no reason or cause of
His willing,” because no creature is above Him, and He Himself is “the
rule of all things.” Whatever He does in His arbitrariness is good, “not because He must or ought to will thus.” “His [man’s] will must have reason

"8 1bid., p. 284. Shortly after its appearance, the work was translated into German
by
Jonas under the title, “Dass der freie Wille nichts sei” Recently a new edition of
this translation was published by Gogarten, with an introduction which strongly assails
the appreciation of Luther as a hero of civilization. Albert Ritschl
styled the treatise "De Servo

Arbitrio” “an unfortunate piece of bungling” (Joh. v. Walter, Das
Wesen der Religion
nach Erasmus und Luther, 1906, p. 124). In 1 559, Melanchthon, referring
to the fantastic ideas of Luther contained in

this

work,

deliria.” Cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. VI, p. 153.
T4 1bid., p. 284.
75 1bid., p. 288.

78 Ibid., p. 282.

speaks

of

them

as

“stoica et manichaea

THE STORMS AT ERFURT

55

and cause, not so, however, the will of the Creator.” 77 These are Ockhamistic

subtleties and aberrations.

Relative to the Fall of Adam the essential point is that his sin, as the
Protestant Kattenbusch puts it, “is caused by God,” whereas “fundamentally nothing is gained” by the other reflections of Luther.”® And that is the
sin of our first parents, through which, according to Luther, the whole

human race was plunged into original sin, a misfortune which—again following Luther—radically tainted the entire race.

Since Luther held such views of God and sin already at an
earlier period of his career, it is no wonder that a controversy arose

at Erfurt among the preachers of the new religion, which could
not be terminated by the treatise “On the Enslaved Will.” In
reference to this controversy Luther’s friend Lang, the leader of
the Reformation at Erfurt, wrote to him for information. “I perceive,” Luther replied, “how indolent you are whilst Satan is on

the offensive everywhere.” “Why do you quarrel among yourselves
about the evil which God does . . . we do evil because God ceases
to work in us,” etc.” This advice did not restore peace at Erfurt, since

the preachers there were a quarrelsome lot. Luther refused to send
them an official letter of instruction as he had been requested to do by

Lang, but declared: “Let them practice faith and love; everything
else is well known.”

Erfurt, the city which had harbored the whilom peaceful cells
of Luther and his fellow-monks, was on the verge of a profound
agitation.

4. THE STORMS AT ERFURT

The city of Erfurt, which was subject to the archbishop of Mayence, affords a typical illustration of the storms which accompanied
the progress of the religious revolution in 1525. It will repay us, there-

fore, to review the events which occurred there in the course of this
year, and Luther’s attitude towards them.
Luther,
After the first “anticlerical upheaval” (Pfaffensturm),d “Epist
le
printe
a
who had just returned from the Wartburg, issued
bances
distur
t
agains
to the Church of Erfurt,” warning the members
77 Ibid., pp. 282 sq.
78 1bid., p. 283.

.

79 April 12, 1522 (Briefwechsel, 111, p. 331.)

306

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

and setting forth his own attitude: “As yet I have not raised a finger
against them [the papists]; Christ has slain them with the might
of His tongue.” 8 At Erfurt, he delivered a sermon which was
calculated to arouse strong animosity against *“‘the fat and lazy
priests and monks,” as he characterized them, “who only feed their
big bellies.” “We must crush the seed of this Satanic head.” He

boldly maintained that the secular rule of the archbishop of Mayence

had no right to exist, and “in virtue of the orthodox faith you are
spiritual and should judge all things.” “Faith does everything, and
good works, too, result from it.” 81

The religious upheaval at Erfurt, however, failed to produce these
good fruits, but engendered bad moral conditions, so that even
Eobanus Hessus, a friend of the Reformation, known as “King

of poets,” wrote in 1524: “Immorality, corruption of youth, contempt of learning, and dissensions, such are the fruits of your
Evangel.” “Oh, unhappy Erfurt!”—he cries in a letter of this same

year, in which he stigmatizes “the outrageous behavior of these godless men of God,” namely, the apostate priests and new preachers.
He sees the battle-field of the passions tinged with “blood.” 82
The scholarly Augustinian, Bartholomew Usingen, who had once
been Luther’s professor at the University of Erfurt, also predicted
a bloody revolution for the same year (1524), which was to break
out at Erfurt and reach the most remote districts. In his gloomy fore-

bodings he prophesied that the religious storm would bring about
the decline of the empire and the loss of Germany’s ancient greatness. “Why,” he remonstrates with one of the revolutionary preachers
of Erfurt, “why have you ordered out the pickax, the mattock, and

the spade in your sermons, if the Word of God is sufficient for the
Church? Why have you called out to the mob that the peasant must
abandon the soil in order to come to the aid of the gospel?” 83
Oblivious of the debt of gratitude which he owed him, Luther, who
was familiar with the energy with which Usingen championed the

cause of the Church, denounced the venerable man as a fool. In a tone
of frivolity he jeered at the teachers of the university to which he was

indebted for his education, and who still remained Catholic, decry-

ing them as the “sophists of the biretta and the pointed hats.”
80 July ro, 15225 Erl. ed., Vol. LI, p. 139
81 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 347.
82 Ibid., pp. 349 sq.

(Briefwechsel, 1II, p. 431).
'

83 1bid., pp. 336 sqq., where proof is adduced for the following statements,

THE STORMS AT ERFURT

307

The Reformation received every imaginable assistance from the
majority of the town-councilors at Erfurt. Thus encouraged, Johann

Lang, a renegade Augustinian monk, proposed the slogan, “The
gospel must be sustained by the aid of the sword.” 8¢ The Catholic
canons of St. Mary’s and St. Severin’s were repeatedly compelled
to protest against acts of violence. By confiscating their possessions

the town-council intended to force them and the remaining clergy
to yield. On April 27, 1525, when the revolutionary spirit already

stalked through wide stretches of Germany, and the war-cries of
the peasants resounded, the treasuries of the two afore-mentioned
churches were subjected to a close search by the magistrate. Splendid
works of art, which had been given by the forefathers, and faithfully preserved by the Church, were squandered and destroyed.
When the day of the peasants’ revolt dawned in the vicinity of
Erfurt, they impetuously demanded the new liberties. Their object
was equality with the citizenry, who were hostile to the magistrates.
They made their peremptory demands in the name of the new

gospel. “God has enlightened us to march upon Erfurt with arms,”
one of their leaders exclaimed.®® The representatives of fourteen
villages in the district of Erfurt, having met in a tavern, swore

“with upraised hands” “to fortify the Word of God, and to form
an alliance for life, with the object of abolishing the ancient tribute
of which they had freed themselves.” On April 25 or 26, they ap-

peared with scythes, hoes, and carbines beneath the walls of the
city. The magistrate at once conceived the clever idea of diverting

ate of
the malcontents upon the clerical estate and the Electornn
von
Herma
with
tions
Mayence. Having completed their negotia
the
of
nt
oppone
an
and
Hoff, president of the Erfurt town-council
mob,
ening
threat
the
to
clergy, they opened the gates of the city

s.
on condition that it would spare the property of the citizen
were
er,
howev
The palace of the archbishop and the custom house,
nces of the

turned over to them. The salt-kilns and almost allbyreside
the mob, who
ered
clergy were eventually stormed and plund
s, images,
vessel
d
‘with unspeakable barbarity disposed of the sacre
many of the lower
and relics belonging to the churches, assisted byGiinz
burg, Aegidius
citizenry. “Lutheran preachers like Eberlin von
the excellent
proofs are adduced, particularly from
85 Ibid., pp. 357 $qq., there furtheraufsti
nde im 16. Jabrbundert, Halle, 1903.

84 1bid., p. 350.

work of Eitner, Erfurt und dic Bauern

308

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

Mecheer, and Johann Lang, mingled with the citizens and peasants
before the palace at Mayence and harangued them.” Every convent

occupied by nuns was confiscated, and the inmates were expelled
without mercy in order to furnish quarters for the peasants. The

Augustinian monastery, where Luther had sojourned as a2 monk, was

desecrated by the invaders.

Sentence of death was pronounced upon the ancient cult by the
adoption of a resolution which decreed that pastors were to be installed and deposed only by the congregations and that “the pure
Word of God” alone was to be preached in the pulpit, “clearly and
without any addition of human commandments, ordinances, and
doctrines.” Johann Lang, “the apostate, fugitive, and married monk,”
as a contemporary Catholic writer calls him, was appointe

d preacher

at the cathedral. Most of the clergy left the city.
With the consent of the magistrate the archiepiscopal rule was
declared terminated.
|
The magistrate was soon deposed and replaced by two
committees,

one constituted of the lower citizenry, the other

jointly assumed the government of the city. The

of the peasants, who

former members of
the magistracy were threatened with decapitation
. The preachers,
however, succeeded in restoring their authority.
As a norm for the future guidance of the
community, which
was deeply divided, twenty-eight very accom
modating articles were

proposed by the town-council and receiv
ed the “new seal” of the
municipality and the peasantry. The preac
hing of the pure Word
of God and the free election of pastors
again headed the list. For

the rest, the citizens and peasants hedge
d the town-council about
with many limitations, On account of certai
n debatable points, it

was agreed to leave the regulation
of the town to Luther, who,

however, wisely refused. His interventi
on could only have made

matters worse.

He was not qualified

for such

pacific labors

and

had no talent for public organization. Moreo
ver, at that time, when
the defeat and punishment of the peasan
ts had already begun, he

was agitated by that unhappy frenz
y against the mob which crops

out in his writings. On this account,

the twenty-eight articles were
placed before him only for his written opinio
n.
The town-council knew how little the
demands which had been

extorted from it and which were so

favorable to the peasants, could

be expected to meet with the approval
of Luther. In matter of

THE STORMS AT ERFURT

309

fact he pronounced the articles absolutely “inept” and wrote 8¢
that they clearly revealed that they were being proposed by “men
who are too prosperous,” whose demands were being made at the
expense of the magistracy and to the detriment of the public welfare. He claimed that “they wanted to subvert the existing order
of things with unheard-of presumption and malice”; that these
articles reduced the council to the level of servants of the community; that they caused the “city of Erfurt to be lost” to the

princes; and that it had even been resolved to withhold from the

Saxon Elector, the legal protector of Erfurt, the tax to be paid by his

subjects for protection. The “mob” should not be allowed to govern
all things, to bind the magistrate hand and foot and set it up as
an “idol” and let it see how *“the horses drive the coachman.” It

is worthy of note that, whilst he was in this restraining mood, Luther
found it quite inadmissible that congregations should appoint their
own pastors and demanded that the town-council should at least
exercise a certain “‘supervision” in this matter.

|

However, he was pleased with that article which provided that
persons who plied an indecent trade should no longer be tolerated,
and that the “house of common women” should be closed—a measure
which he advocated also for other cities.” For the rest, we may remark that, during the archiepiscopal régime, a house of correction
for the punishment of loose women had existed at Erfurt, but had
been razed to the ground when the peasants entered the town.

Luther is silent about the abolition of the sovereignty of the
archbishop of Mayence. In a sharp letter issued May 26 through
his viceregent, Archbishop Albrecht had refused to relinquish his
rights over the city and demanded the expulsion of the Lutheran
sects and an expiatory tribute. But the Elector John of Saxony

promised the town-council that he would support them on the religious issue and act as their “liege lord, territorial and protecting
prince,” since he, too, was devoted to the Word of God. Relative

to the secular government of Mayence, John, no less than the other
protector, Duke George of Saxony, insisted upon an amicable understanding. This demand became effective only after the Elector of
Mayence threatened to appeal for armed intervention to the dreaded
Swabian League. The remnant of the peasants withdrew from the
86 On September 19; Erl. ed., Vol. LVI, p. XII (Briefwechsel, V, p. 243).

87 Grisar, Luther, Vol. II, p. 359.

310

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

occupied city, Albrecht’s sovereignty was reéstablished, and the ex-

pelled clerics were reinstated. They had yielded only to superior
force. The Catholic element at Erfurt was still numerous, wealthy,
and influential. The city council was compelled to promise the
Archbishop to reconstruct the demolished buildings and to make
restitution, as far as possible, for the spoliation which he and the
churches had sustained. In addition, the town-council was obliged
to pay him 2,500 gulden and to indemnify the two collegiate churches,

namely, the cathedral and the church of St. Sever, to the extent of
1,200 silver marks. These two stately churches have remained in
the possession of Catholics up to the present time.
On the other hand, however, Lutheranism obtained complete liberty to propagate itself. At the time of the restoration of the two

churches, Cardinal Albrecht, who was formally reinstated in 1530,
declared with a striking and far-reaching indulgence, “as regards the
other churches, and matters of faith and ritual, we hereby and on this
occasion neither give nor take, sanction nor forbid anything to any
party.” 88

The Augustinian monastery at Erfurt, that submerged seat of
Catholic piety, did not survive the revolution of 1§525. On July
31 of that year, Adam Horn, the last prior, received permission

from John von Spangenberg, the vicar-general of the dispersed
Congregation, to abandon the monastery, since he was no longer

safe in it. Usingen joined the brethren of his Order at Wiirzburg.
The last trace of Nathin is found in 1523. Of an aged monk, who
remained loyal to the Church and was compelled to live outside
the cloister, Flacius Illyricus relates that he used to recall the religious
zeal which Luther had displayed in the monastery and his dutiful observance of the rule.8?
A courageous and eloquent Franciscan, Dr. Conrad Kling, rallied

the Catholics of Erfurt about himself. When he preached in the
capacious hospital, the audience was so numerous as to overflow
into the churchyard outside.
The Catholic members of the town-council, encouraged by Kling,
to the annoyance of Luther championed the cause of Catholicity
with such success that the Lutheran preachers saw their mission in
the city rendered precarious. They complained to Luther that their
88 1bid., p. 361.

89 1bid., p. 361, note 2.

THE NEW STATE CHURCH

=

revenues were restricted and they were reduced to “hunger, misery,
and destitution.” The people demanded to know who had sent
them. Suffering from public contempt, they thought of abandoning the town, when, in 1533, Luther encouraged them to remain and
sustained them by means of a letter which he had composed jointly
with Melanchthon and Jonas.?® Their mission, he said, was not to
be contested, since they had been “openly and unreservedly” called
by the town-council; they should “be patient for a year or a short
time.” Referring to the end of the world, he said that the treat-

ment to which they were subjected was but an “unsightly, horrible
aspect of the end of the world, and of the last fury and wrath of

Satan, equally terrible to behold.” He promised to appeal to the
Elector of Saxony, “who does not favor the religious services of the
papists,” against the reprobate monk Kling.

The acts of the soldiery against the peasants, and Luther’s state of mind
against the mcb, inspired him at that time to compose a work which he
curiously entitled: “Whether Soldiers can be in the State of Grace.” ®* He
says previous ages did not raise this question, and pretends it was the first
time that it was found necessary to solve a case of conscience for
the soldiers. He tries to show that it is “divine” to subdue the mob and un-

just enemies with violence. The plea sounds like a justification of his pronouncements against the murderous peasants, especially when he asserts that

it is God, not man, who destroys unjust, hostile force. “It is God who hangs,
quarters, decapitates, slaughters, and makes war.” 92 Subjects—the mob—
may in no instance constitute themselves judges of authority. It is foolish to
yield too much to the mob, lest it become frenzied; the mob is rather to bear

and suffer the utmost, as a Christian duty, even if the authorities do not observe the oaths they have taken. No one may rise against tyrants; but if the

masses, nevertheless, expel or slaughter them, it is to be regarded as a divine

fate; the sword of Damocles hangs suspended over their heads all the time.
§. THE NEW STATE CHURCH

Luther was absolutely right in assuring the Erfurt preachers that
the Elector John of Saxony was pro-Lutheran. In fact, he put the
case too mildly when he said that John did not favor the religious
90 Erl. ed., Vol. LV, p. 25 (Briefwechsel, IX, p. 341).

91 Weimar ed., Vol. XIX, pp. 628 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXII, pp. 244 saq. this: pamphlet

was written towards the close of 1526,
92 Er], ed., Vol. XXII, p. 250,

312

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

services of the papists. The Elector had been completely won over
to the new religious system by Luther, who knew how to approach
and influence Frederick’s successor, who was inadequately instructed
in matters of religion.
John of Saxony became the patron of Lutheranism and the founder
:
of the State Church.

The state-controlled Church was greatly promoted by the status
of the congregations which had adopted the new religion, but were
too weak to stand on their own feet. Sprung from the contests
which the members waged against one another, and: organized in
the main as a result of the violent procedure of the magistrate, these
congregations promised little durability, because of the want of internal cohesion. Hence, as was indicated before, Luther considered
the territorial lords as the natural pillars of his Church. The secular
rulers alone were in a position to defend the preachers of the new
evangel, to remove undesirable persons from office, and to overcome
the external consequences of the existing dissension among the
citizens.

Thus, with Luther’s co-operation, the system of territorial churches
was born as the result of a certain necessity. It was nurtured and
strengthened by the prospects of secularization, held out to the territorial rulers, of the rich ecclesiastical possessions, and also by the
prospect of an increase of authority. The prevailing tendency of
the age, which consisted in the self-exaltation of the powers of

the princes and their endeavor to make themselves independent of
the Empire and the authority of the Emperor, aided them very
effectively. Since their victory over the peasants, the politicians felt
that an approximation to absolutism was the only salvation in

these chaotic conditions. For parishes and schools were threatened
with extinction, and the rural population was sinking back into
barbarism. Hence, it appeared to be the principal social and spiritual
task of the government to take complete charge of church affairs,

not only for individual communities, but for the country as a whole.
After the social revolution had been crushed, the influential classes
benevolently and submissively co-operated with the princes to forestall future revolutions.
As long as Spalatin occupied the position of court-preacher at
the court of the new Elector of Saxony, he was a helpful assistant
to Luther in the latter’s attempt to establish a compulsory national

THE NEW STATE CHURCH

313

church. Both men regarded it as their primary duty to fan the
flames of the anti-Catholic prejudice of their ruler.
Spalatin wrote to the Elector on October 1, 1525: “Dr. Martinus also
says that your Electoral Grace is on no account to permit anyone to continue the un-Christian ceremonies any longer, or to start them again.” °

In a letter to Spalatin, dated November 11, which was intended for the
Elector, Luther expounded the thesis that by stamping out the Catholic
worship rulers would not be forcing the faith on anyone, but merely
prohibiting such open abominations as the Mass. Moreover, he demanded that
the right to emigrate should be extended to obstinate papists.®*

The Elector was unable to resist this powerful appeal.
On February 9, 1526, he received a letter directly from Luther, which
was intended to encourage him to attack the idolaters. Should he protect
them, “every abomination would burden his conscience before God.” In the
second place, he should reflect that “mutiny and factionism” would sweep
over the cities and the rural districts in consequence of the existence of diverse
kinds of worship. Again he declares: “Only one kind of doctrine may be
preached in any one place.” John replied in a friendly tone, assuring Luther
that he would “know how to conduct himself in a Christian and correct
manner.”

~

Soon the Elector intervened in the appointments to ecclesiastical
positions and in the government of the new religious society. The
principle of territorial sovereignty in ecclesiastical affairs was established rather by practice than by open declarations. With astounding

dexterity Luther often acted as if he regarded the territorial lord
as a kind of patriarchal ruler, similar to the rulers of Israel in the
Old Testament. He gradually advanced to this position after 1520,

when, in his sermon “On Good Works,” in which he addressed the
secular authority for the first time, he demanded that “kings, princes,
and the nobility” should commence to reform ecclesiastical condi-

tions according to his ideas.®® As long as possible, he had upheld
his impractical ideal of a congregational religion, especially since
the Elector Frederick was not in favor of a more compact orgamza-

tion of the new religious system. But now, under John, his policy,

openly favored by the court, was completely changed.
98 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1I, p. 331.
94 1bid.

95 K. Holl, Lutber, 2nd ed., 1923, p. 327.

314

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

He considered three points in particular.®® First the disposition to be made
of the property belonging to the Catholic Church. Who was to get this
property when confiscated? With a highly characteristic conception of juris-

prudence, he answers this question thus: As a matter of course, it accrues to
the territorial lord, though it should be preserved as much as possible for
ecclesiastical uses. And it will be necessary that the ministers of the new

religion be adequately supported therefrom. None other than the prince can

look to this, since the nobility, as experience has demonstrated, endeavor to
enrich themselves by the confiscation of church property under all kinds
of pretexts; and also because the newly established congregations show them-

selves unwilling or incapable of supplying the ordinary necessities of the
preachers.
The second point he stresses is this: Consistent with the utmost liberty
possible, doctrine and ritual ought to be made uniform throughout the land;
which is impossible without the help of government. As a result Luther now
(1525) begins to direct his efforts towards a visitation, to be ordered by the
princes.

The third point is the continuation of the Mass in many places. “The
unity of our Church,” says Luther, “suffers in consequence thereof.” ®7

The prince alone, he says, can suppress the Mass—an object which
Luther pursued with passionate zeal.
On the thirty-first of October he conferred with the Elector relative to
the disposition of the church property and the support of his ministers. As

John does not show himself averse, Luther takes up the second point, the
internal condition of the congregations. This he does at“first by innuendo,
then by definitely indicating his wishes.”® On November 30, 1525, he proposed a visitation to be held under the auspices of the Elector. He suggests
“that Your Electoral Grace order the visitation of all parishes in the entire
principality,” so that evangelical preachers may be appointed and properly

supported for the congregations that desire them.

The desired visitation was realized by the electoral instruction of
1527, which definitely completed the régime of territorial churches.
True, it was not all done according to Luther’s notions. He grievously
complained of the undue restraints which the State imposed upon
the authority of the Church. Thus the contradictoriness of his attitude avenged itself upon him.
Nothing is so little to the point as to say of Luther’s attitude
and view of things as Holl does: “Everything has been clearly and
96 Cfr. for the following Holl, op. cit., pp. 361 sqq.
97 1bid., p. 363, n. 1.

98 1bid., p. 364.

PROGRESSIVE DESTRUCTION OF CATHOLICISM

31§

harmoniously worked out.” #® In reality, Luther does not conceive

of the Church as a true society and is as little able to appreciate a
Christian State “as a Christian cobbler shop,” to quote another
Protestant author, since he divides the kingdom of the world from

the kingdom of God by a deep chasm.!°® Because he repudiated
both the ancient Church and the traditional conception of the State,
he had no foundation for his church except the good pleasure of the
princes.

6. PROGRESSIVE DESTRUCTION OF CATHOLICISM

1525 was a year of tempests in the history of the propagation of

Lutheranism, which brought great conquests. The extent to which the
religious revolution spread among the higher and lower strata of
society was unexpectedly great.

The want of rapidity in the progress of the new movement in the
Electorate of Saxony, attributable to the dissatisfaction of the rural
population with the leadership of Luther, was supplied by the activity
of the territorial government, which was counseled and directed
by Lutheran politicians who were zealous for the interests of the
crown, particularly by the electoral chancellor, Gregory Briick. It
was also supplied by the married preachers, who congregated in this
Electorate, and not in the least by the municipal magistrates who,
in virtue of their new réle, had suddenly been projected into im-

portant cultural and civil positions.
In the adjacent Duchy of Saxony, on the other hand, the watchfulness and energy of Duke George, the territorial ruler, prevented the
new religion from spreading to any large extent.
The gates of Hesse were opened to the new religion by the young
Landgrave, Philip II, who has been undeservedly surnamed *the
Magnanimous.” As a result of the frivolous and immoral life of

his mother (commonly called Madame Venus), this ruler lacked
a strict religious and moral training. He was lively and talented,
but devoid of religious sentiments or wants. A regent when but
twenty years old, Philip II met Melanchthon and became interested

in Lutheranism. On July 18, 1524, he issued 2 mandate in which he
granted free scope to the propagation of Luther’s teachings within his
99 Ibid., p. 350.
100 15id., p. 347.

316

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

ately
jurisdiction. He embraced the new religion himself and obstin
l remon-

defended this step against the well-intentioned and forcefu
strations of his father-in-law, Duke George. In March, 1525, on the
occasion of a meeting with the Elector John of Saxony and the latter’s
son, Philip assured them that he intended to dedicate his country and
his people, nay, his very life to the new gospel. He spurned the invitation of Duke George of Saxony to join the League of Dessau for the
pacification of Germany after the Peasants’ War, and for the sup-

pression of the ferment of unrest, namely, the Lutheran religion.
In opposition to that League, Landgrave Philip conceived the idea
of a military league of evangelicals, which was formed at Torgau and
Gotha between him and the Elector of Saxony. None of the German

princes were more determined than the young ruler of Hesse to gain

recognition for this League and to extend it far and wide. In the

background of his mind, however, were other soaring ambitions. It
was his intention to resist the power of the Hapsburgs and to frustrate
the contemplated elevation of the Archduke Ferdinand to the imperial throne. “With Philip’s espousal of the evangelical cause,” says
Theodore Kolde, “a political element [rectius, a new political element]

entered into nascent Protestantism.” 1°! It redounded to its extreme

advantage, but also brought with it many disadvantages. For his bold
policy soon induced Philip to form a close alliance with the South

German and Swiss Zwinglians, with whose aid he expected to oppose
the Emperor. His policy, however, was an explosive that created internal dissension.

Philip’s dictatorial conduct manifested itself when, on July 12,
1526, accompanied by 200 cavaliers, he entered Spires to attend
the diet, where, despite the objections of the presiding officer, Archduke Ferdinand, he permitted the preaching of “evangelical” sermons

from the open gallery of his headquarters, which was accessible to
the public. His reply to the Archduke’s remonstrances was that
he would tolerate no interference, even were he to forfeit his life.
The insignia which his retinue bore on their sleeves to indicate the
new religion they professed, were composed of the initials V.D.M.LA.
(Verbum Dei manet in aeternum). The Elector of Saxony had
adopted the same insignia for his followers. Both the Landgrave and
the Elector gave expression to their military alliance by vesting their
retinue with uniforms of the same color.

101 Realenzyklopadie fiir prot. Theologie und Kirche, Vol. XV, 3rd ed., p. 299.

PROGRESSIVE DESTRUCTION OF CATHOLICISM

317

In the beginning of April, 1525, Luther wrote exultingly to
George Polentz, Bishop of Samland: “Behold the miracle! With a
rapid stride and with full sails the Gospel hastens to Prussial” 102

In the same year the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, Albrecht of
Brandenburg-Ansbach, illegally proclaimed himself first Duke of
Prussia, one of the territories of that Order, thus becoming the founder

of the Lutheran State Church in the ecclesiastical district entrusted to
his Order.
Albrecht, one of the fifteen children of the Margrave Frederick,
had received a defective training, since his father, owing to his limited income and his numerous progeny, aimed at having his son make
a living by obtaining a situation with ecclesiastical or secular courts,
rather than by means of a thorough education. He procured two canonical benefices at the archiepiscopal court of the Elector of Cologne.

Thereafter he plied the soldier’s trade and for some time, having been

taken ill, stayed at the residence of the Hungarian court. The.

Knights of the Teutonic Order elected him Grand Master in 1511, at
the recommendation of Duke George of Saxony. He took the custom-

ary vow of perpetual chastity, as prescribed by the statutes of the
Order, and promised, under oath before the altar, to preserve and
defend, as a possession of the Holy See, the territory of the Order
that belonged to the Church. Allured by material ambitions, how-

ever, he formed a secret alliance with Luther, beginning with June,
1521, through his confidential adviser, Oeden. This alliance purposed to effect an arbitrary reorganization of the Order. It was in

contravention of the papal directions, to which Albrecht was in duty
bound to adhere, and which were designed to effect the amelioration of the condition of the unmarried knights and the clergy of the
Order—a condition which was very much in need of reform. Afterwards he paid a personal visit to Luther at Wittenberg. Incompetent

to pass judgment on the latter’s teachings, he was, nevertheless,

familiar with the decision of the Church.

:

The ardent demands which Luther made upon Albrecht, such as
the secularization of the Prussian territory of the Teutonic Order,
and that he himself should marry, infatuated his mind. They were
invitations which Luther, in his desire to gain a mighty position in
the east, confirmed and generalized in his ““Admonition to the Teutonic Order to avoid false chastity,” published in 1523.
102 Brjefwechsel, V, p. 159.

318

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 1525

The Grand Master permitted evangelical preachers, such as Briessmann, Speratus, and, later on, Poliander, to enjoy untrammeled lib-

erty of action in Konigsberg, his residential city. Thence they extended their activity into the country. The apostasy of two bishops

who ‘belonged to the Prussian territory of the order, Georg von

Polentz, bishop of Samland, and Eberhard von Queiss, bishop of
Pomesania, opened the gates wide to the Reformation. The Grand
Master permitted both apostates to continue in office, while he himself
almost continuously sojourned abroad and succeeded in concealing
his intentions of secularization and marriage. When the report of his
intended marriage was noised about, his brother John warned him
in touching words and pleaded with him not to disgrace his name
and family by breaking his vow. However, he merely received an
evasive reply.
‘
In spring, 1525, Albrecht of Brandenburg believed that the time
had arrived for carrying out his plan.
On April 9, he concluded a dishonorable and humiliating peace
with King Sigismund of Poland, who had warred upon the territory
of the Order. In return, Albrecht accepted as a fief from Poland the

entire territory of the ecclesiastical State of Prussia. At the same
time he declared himself secular “Duke of Prussia.” Six days after

this event went forth a ducal mandate ordering a change of religion
for all the inhabitants of the territory. It imposed a penalty upon
the clergy who were disobedient or rebellious to the new evangel.

On July 1, 1526, the castle of Konigsberg witnessed Albrecht’s solemn marriage to Dorothy, a young daughter of the Danish King.

His example was imitated by the two bishops who had become Lutherans. They were the first apostate bishops of the age of the Refor-

mation. In a new ordinance for the government of the territory, the
first territorial diet, convened at Kénigsberg on December 6, 1525,

had formulated laws to correspond to the new and altered religious
conditions. The banner of ducal Prussia, which Albrecht was forced
to accept from King Sigismund, waved over the assembly hall. In
place of the former black cross of the Order on a white background,
appeared the black eagle, which has remained the Prussian coat-ofarms up to the present day. The protests of the Knights of the Teu-

tonic Order outside of Prussia, the declaration of the ban and the
executory mandates of the Empire were alike futile against the ac-

complished violation. The solemn protest of the Pope, whose right

PROGRESSIVE DESTRUCTION OF CATHOLICISM

319

to the territory of the Order had been grossly outraged, was equally
futile. Naturally, the opposition of those inhabitants of the territory
‘who remained loyal to the ancient religion and were determined not
to adapt themselves to the religious innovation which had come upon
them like a raging storm, was likewise ineffectual.

“Thus at an early date,” says a Protestant historian of the Reformation, “Lutheranism took its place among the political factors, and
its development was to a certain extent dependent upon the tendencies and inclinations of the [civil] authorities and ruling sovereigns
of that day.” 103

The forcible intervention of the secular governments furnishes the
key to the solution of the mystery why the Reformation made such
rapid progress.

As early as 1523, a fanatical furrier named Melchior Hoffmann,

a native of Swabian Hall, made his appearance in Livonia as a lay
preacher of Luther’s doctrines. An attack was made upon the residences of the cathedral canons and upon churches and cloisters at

Dorpat, in January, 1525. Owing to dissensions that had arisen between the preachers of the new religion, Hoffmann obtained a favorable testimonial for his person from Luther at Wittenberg. In con-

junction with Bugenhagen, Luther wrote his admonition “To the
Christians in Livonia.” In this letter, which was forthwith published,
he exhorts his followers not to cause any trouble on account of differences due to external customs.1®* Following Luther’s trail, Hoffmann
became absorbed in eschatological chimeras. Thus he prophesied that
the year 1533 would witness the end of the world. He became one

of the leaders of the Anabaptists. Indeed, it was due chiefly to the
snfluence which he exercised in his ceaseless journeys, that the Anabaptist sect was transplanted from Upper to Lower Germany. After
a stormy career at Reval, Stockholm, Holstein (disputation at Flensburg, 1529), in East Frisia, and elsewhere, Hoffmann finally made
his appearance in Strasburg, which had been thoroughly upset by the
reformers. Owing to the “Gospel of the Covenant” which he preached
enthusiastically, he and his followers (“Melchiorites”) became accomplices in the atrocities which were perpetrated by the Anabaptists
at Miinster. Nowhere is the spiritual affinity between the Anabaptist
system and Lutheranism so clearly manifested as in the internal ex103 W, Friedensburg, quoted by Grisar, Lutber, Vol. I, p. 333.
104 Ef]. ed., Vol. LIII, pp. 315 sqq. (Briefwechsel, V. p. 198).

320

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

periences and inspirations which moved this “apostolic herald,” as he
described himself, despite the fact that Luther combated him after
1527 and wished to see him return to his former craft of furrier. For
this reason Hoffmann in his writings stigmatized Luther as a “Judas”

who persecuted the faithful. This remarkable prophet of the Anabaptist
movement died as a prisoner of the Zwinglians about 1543 at Strasburg, after extensive wanderings, in which he believed himself accompanied by heavenly voices.
The Anabaptists of Upper Germany possessed a type of overexcited preacher and leader in the weaver Augustine Bader. He was a
friend of Denk, Hetzer, and Hut, Anabaptist leaders of Southern
Germany, and not only passed himself off for a prophet, but also for
a future “king,” which rank he intended to obtain with the aid of
the Turks. Secretly his adherents had supplied him with the insignia
of royalty, made of gold-plated silver, such as a crown, scepter,
poniard and chains, together with a sumptuous costume. Destiny,
however, overtook him in a nightly assembly at Blaubeuren; he was
apprehended as an insurrectionist, tortured with glowing tongs, and
burnt in the market-place of Stuttgart on March 30, 1§30. 103
The adherents of the new religion, who proceeded against Melchior
Hoffmann, at Strasburg, obtained control of that city in 1529. In
that year, the magistrate, being under the dominant influence of
Zwinglian-minded preachers, completely abolished the Mass. Even as
far back as 1524, the authorities of the city had authorized the de-

struction of images in churches. The defection from the Church
was especially promoted by Matthew Zell, an apostate priest, who

had married the daughter of a Strasburg artisan in r523; also by
Caspar Hedio, until 1523 preacher at the court of Albrecht of May-

ence; but above all by Martin Bucer, a native of Schlettstadt, at one
time a2 Dominican and afterwards pastor at Landstuhl. In 1523, Bucer entered upon an epistolary correspondence with Zwingli and
soon after embraced many of the latter’s rationalistic teachings, es-

pecially the denial of the Real Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist. Owing to the violent procedure of himself and his friends, Stras-

burg, after 1524, experienced the progressive destruction of sacred
images, as demanded by Zwingli. The most severe measures of repres-

sion were adopted against the Catholics. The Zwinglian gospel, how-

ever, produced so little fruit that Bucer was forced to write after
105 G. Bossert in Archiv fir Reformationsgeschichte, Vols. X and XI

(1912-1914).

PROGRESSIVE DESTRUCTION OF CATHOLICISM

321

some years: “Among us in Strasburg there is scarcely any church, no
recognition of the Word of God, no frequentation of the Sacraments.”” 106

As matters fared in the free imperial city of Strasburg, so they
developed in other imperial cities and in cities subject to episcopal
rule. Insurrection, iconoclasm, and sacrilegious violation of churches
accompanied the introduction of the new gospel in Basle by Oecolampadius, in 1529, in St. Gall by Vadian in 1529, and in Constance

by Blaurer—to mention only those cities which were Protestantized
according to the Zwinglian idea.

The year 1525 also marked a decisive change in the free imperial
city of Nuremberg. Here one could observe how another motive fatally co-operated in the religious upheaval, namely, the activity of
renegade priests and religious. A number of Augustinians at that
place, who were friendly to Luther, commenced by deserting their
cloister. Shortly afterwards, apostate members of the secular and
regular clergy began to preach the reformed religion. At first the

magistrate of the town prohibited only the discussion of controversial questions from the pulpit. Two provosts and the prior of the
Augustinians abolished the Mass. John Walther, an Augustinian

preacher at the church of St. Sebaldus, the abbot of St. Aegidius, and
the provost Pressler embraced the state of matrimony. One of the
prime movers was Andrew Osiander, a renegade priest and preacher
who later became famous as a Protestant controversialist. He, too,
married. At the diet of Nuremberg, in 1524, the Catholic prelates

were mocked by the excited mob. The condition of the many loyal
or doubting Catholics became even worse after the impetuous Wenceslaus Link, a companion of Luther’s in the monastery of Witten-

berg, came to Nuremberg from Altenburg in the company of his
wife and, in August, 1525, commenced to function there as custodian
and preacher in the New Hospital. In this latter year the towncouncil formally decreed the adoption of the Lutheran religion. Laz-

arus Spengler, clerk of the town-council, was mainly instrumental
in bringing about this decision.
During the period of the religious upheaval, Spengler and other
members of the town-council, like Jerome Ebner and Caspar Niit-

zel, succeeded in preserving from destruction at least the images, altars, and other objects of religious art for which the imperial city
108 Janssen-Pastor, Gesch. d. deutschen Volkes, Vol. III, 20th ed., p. 106.

322

THE TEMPESTUOUS YEAR, 152§

was famous. The ornaments of the churches also survived, to a great
extent, the subsequent iconoclastic assaults of Zwinglianism; and even
at this late day they evidence the profoundly religious life and artistic
fervor of Nuremberg’s Catholic period.
By the adoption of tyrannical decrees the magistrates shackled the
old religion. The exercise of pastoral functions was denied to the religious orders, the clergy were classified as civilians, and those who

complied willingly were assured the life-long enjoyment of their
benefices. The monastery of St. Aegidius, with a community numbering twenty-five persons, surrendered to the town-council in 1525.
The Augustinian convent, of which no less than twenty-five members, allured by liberty and matrimony, had embraced Lutheranism,
likewise surrendered. The Carmelite and Carthusian monasteries
eventually also surrendered, although many of their inmates remained
loyal to the ancient religion, among them being the courageous prior
of the Carmelite monastery, Andrew Stoss, a son of Vitus Stoss, the
celebrated sculptor. He determinedly resisted the town-council for
a long time. Thus, in the course of one single year, 1525, Nuremberg

experienced a complete transformation. The Dominicans remained
loyal till 1543, when five of the last remaining members surrendered
their monastery to the city authorities.

The most notable resistance was offered by the Order of Friars
Minor, whose members suffered every kind of persecution and the most
bitter poverty until the last survivor passed away, in 1562. The Poor
Clares, pious daughters of the Saint of Assisi, remained loyal under the
rule of their highly cultured abbess, Charitas Pirkheimer, a sister of the
famous humanist, until their gallant community became extinct.

Deprived of their preacher and confessor, these nuns, eighty in all,
most of whom were of patrician descent, were forced to listen. to the

sermons of Osiander and other Protestant dominies behind the latticework of their cloister. The Gothic choir of their church, preserved to
this day, solemnly towers aloft amidst the modern buildings that sur-

round it, a monument to the heroic fortitude of these nuns. The un-

pretentious old cloister, once the residence of the venerable, prudent,

and matronly Charitas Pirkheimer, was demolished only a few

ago.

years

CuAPTER XII

THE DECISIVE YEARS, 1525-1530
1. CHARLES V, CLEMENT VI, AND THE TURKS

The first war between Charles V and Francis I of France ended in
the defeat of the French at Pavia, on February 24, 1525, and the capture of their king. The imperial army, composed of Spaniards, Italians,

and the dreaded German lansquenets, won a decisive victory. The
treaty of peace concluded at Madrid between Charles and Francis on
January 14, 1526, was entirely too severe for France. The release of
the King was purchased at an exorbitant price.

Pope Clement VII, an astute politician, was of the opinion that the
treaty and the oath of King Francis were not binding because they
had been obtained by force. It has been frequently asserted that he
formally released the King from his oath; but the statement is uncertain. ! Nevertheless the Pope, fearing the ascendancy of the Em-

peror in Italy, and apprehensive of his own position in Rome, unfortunately shaped his policies to favor Francis. This proved fatal to the

status of the Church in Germany. The action of the Emperor and the
Empire against the religious upheaval was paralyzed by the demands
made upon the latter in the war-like complications which had arisen,
especially in Italy. The so-called Holy League of Cognac, which had
been formed in opposition to the Emperor between certain Italian
States and France, strengthened by the accession of the Pope, led to
a profound schism between the supreme spiritual and the first temporal authority in Christendom.

In the new conflict between the Franco-Italian and the imperiaail
forces, which lasted from 1526 to the “Ladies’ Peace” of Cambr
the mu(1529), Rome was stormed and fearfully sacked in 1527 by
tinous soldiers under Bourbon, the imperial field-marshal, and George
von Frundsberg, the commander of the L andsknechte.” The capital

of Christendom, degraded by the morals of the Renaissance, suffered
1 Pastor, Geschichte der Pipste, Vol. IV, Part 11, p. 208.
»

.

323

