CHarTER XIX

THE ECCLESTASTICAL SCHISM ANTERIOR TO
LUTHER’S DEATH
I.

THE EVE

OF

THE

RELIGIOUS

WAR.

THE

COUNCIL

In the early forties of the sixteenth century Germany was in a
strained condition, politically and religiously, and no signs of an early
turn for the better were visible. The Turks, more menacing than ever
before, continued their assaults upon the eastern frontiers of the Empire. In 1541 they gained a foothold in Hungary, whence they threat-

ened destruction against Germany. In the west, the King of France was

entering upon his fourth war against Charles V, which dragged on

from 1542 to 1544.
To fill the measure of domestic misery caused by the religious
schism, the Bundestag of Schmalkalden, in March, 1540, declared
against the toleration of Catholic worship. The fruitlessness of the
religious conference of Worms and of the diet of Ratisbon (up to
May 22, 1541) convinced the Catholic spokesmen, John Eck, Julius
von Pflug, and John Gropper, as well as all other intelligent observers,

that the hope of religious reunion was vain.
The diet of Ratisbon closed with the armistice of the so-called
Interim. Two later diets, that of Spires (1542), and that of Nuremberg (1543) endeavored to unite the nation against the Turkish peril.
But the Protestants, because of their extravagant religious demands,
obstinately refused to come to the assistance of the Emperor, as they
were in duty bound to do. The victory of Charles V over the Duke of
Cleve, notwithstanding the support which the latter received from
France and from the Elector of Saxony, proved to be an advantage for
the Catholic cause. In July, 1542, however, that cause was injured by
the violent and victorious irruption of the Schmalkaldian forces into
the duchy of Brunswick, which resulted in the imprisonment of Henry
of Brunswick, the Catholic Duke “Heinz,” whom Luther pursued

with implacable hatred (October 20, 1545).
528

EVE OF THE RELIGIOUS WAR

519

Halle, the see city of Cardinal Albrecht of Mayence, which had so
long defended itself against Lutheranism, was Protestantized by Justus
Jonas through the efforts of Luther, and Albrecht was compelled to
establish his residence at Mayence and Aschaffenburg. He transferred
his celebrated collection of relics to these and other cities. The anti-

nomian, Agricola, who, to escape the wrath of Luther had taken ref-

uge with the Elector of Brandenburg, supported the measures which
that prince employed to promote the Reformation. The religious upheaval continued unimpeded in the duchy of Saxony. The bishop
of Meissen, John von Maltitz, complained as early as 1540 to Bishop
John Faber, of Vienna, that the Catholic press of his diocese had been
reduced to silence, and the prescriptions of the Lutheran “inspectors”

were enforced, whilst the bishop was unable to bestir himself. “I fear,”
he wrote, “that the wrath of God will be visited upon the Pope, the
Emperor, and King Ferdinand, because they permit the decline and
suppression of the Catholic faith.” The deeds of violence, he contin-

ued, were too potent; divine services could no longer be conducted
at Meissen and the sermons in the local church were preached by a
Lutheran minister who had been forced upon the people.!
It was a lamentable accommodation by which, in 1543, the new
religion was permitted to invade the bishoprics of Miinster and Osnabriick. The venerable see of Cologne, the “German Rome,” was as-

sailed by the innovators with every prospect of success under the administration of the weak-kneed and uneducated elector, Herman von
Wied.

In his reports to Rome, the far-seeing papal legate, Morone, uttered
bitter complaints—and not without reason—concerning the attitude
of the great majority of German ecclesiastical princes. He charged
that many flourishing parts of the German Church had been lost in

virtue of their dilatoriness and worldly-mindedness and predicted that
¢he ruin would assume unlimited proportions if the bishops did not
arouse themselves and offer resolute resistance.
In consequence of the deficiency of the German resistance, the Emperor also lapsed into a complaisance which displeased the more zealous
bed
Catholics. Notwithstanding his loyalty to the Church, he succum
going
been
had
which
ent
to the influence of the subversive movem

on for many years. His advisers, even Granvella, were not competent
1 L. Cardauns, according to Vatican manuscripts in the sixth volume of the. Nuntiatur-

berichte (1910), pp. 233 and 237 sq.

530

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

to cope with the difficulties of the situation. At the diet of Spires, in
February, 1544, the empire made undue concessions to the innovators,
although the position of the Emperor had been fortified by the return of Landgrave Philip of Hesse to his former allegiance. In the
recess of June the tenth, the religious controversy was adjourned by
leaving the adherents of the new theology in substantial possession
of their usurped ecclesiastical rights and properties. It was resolved
that a “free Christian council of the German nation” should shortly
attempt a settlement. The very term, “a free council,” was bound to
excite the apprehension that the papal authority would be eliminated.

If the council were restricted to the German nation and conducted as
a mixed spiritual-temporal assembly, composed of Catholics and
Protestants, as was to be feared, it was bound to give rise to the great-

est anxiety. In either event, the expectations connected with a legitimate general council of Christendom, as planned by the Church authorities, could not be realized.
On November 9 of the same year Pope Paul III convoked the ecumenical council which had so often been deferred because of the

belligerency of the times. It was to meet at Trent on the fifteenth of
March, 1545.

The Bull of convocation proclaims that it was intended to put
an end to the religious schism, to effect the reform of the whole of
Christendom, and to achieve unity in the defense of the Cross against

the Crescent. On the twelfth of December of the same year, the coun-

cil was opened by a splendid address by Cardinal Del Monte, the future
Julius ITI. Attended by only thirty-four voting members, the council

faced the prospect of being compelled soon to transfer the seat of its
deliberations elsewhere. In March, 1547, the state of public affairs
forced it to continue its deliberations at Bologna. The opening of the
Tridentine Council took place at almost the same time when the congress of the Schmalkaldic League, assembled at Frankfort on the Main,
issued its protest against the ecumenical council, which had so often
been demanded by the Protestants themselves.
On August 24, 1544, the Pope had addressed grave remonstrances

to the Emperor because of the latter’s attitude toward the religious

schism in Germany.

In a Brief transmitted to Cardinal Morone, which was communic

to King Ferdinand and the Catholic estates of the empire,

ated also

he wrote that he

was deeply grieved to see that the recess of the diet of Spires excluded

from

EVE OF THE RELIGIOUS WAR

§31

the deliberations of religious affairs the Pope, who from the foundation of
the Church had been invested with supreme authority in all such matters.

The Emperor had reason to fear the penalties set forth in Holy Writ against
those who infringed upon the rights of God and His representatives. The
Emperor is not the directive head of the Church, but only its protector. The
increasing complaisance of Charles had made the reclamation of the sep-

arated brethren all the more difficult. He must withdraw the concessions

which (in a spirit of undue clemency) had been made to the enemies of the
Church, otherwise, the Pope could no longer be content with mere admonitions.?

Owing to his Christian convictions, Charles was not prepared to satisfy
the opponents of the papacy by allowing matters to develop into a rupture
~ with Paul III. In defense of himself, he caused an oral reply to be made
to some of the charges contained in the papal Brief. “After calm deliberation

he could not but perceive that the complaints which were preferred by the
Pope with so much determination were not without justification.” *

In 1556, Charles V, under the pressure of his office, which weighed
- heavily upon him, transferred his crown to Philip II, and retired
to the Spanish monastery of San Yuste, where he spent the remainder
of his life.

In opposition to the Catholic estates, and still more in view of the
approaching council, the Protestants endeavored to unite their forces
and organize more effectively. A result of this endeavor was the socalled “Wittenberg Reformation,” which on the fourteenth of Jan-

uary, 1545, Luther and the theologians associated with him at Wittenberg presented to the Elector of Saxony in response to the latter’s
request for an official demonstration. Melanchthon had drafted the

document in such a cautious and apparently mild form that Chancellor Briick wrote that there is “no trace of Doctor Martinus’ boisterousness” in it. This “Wittenberg ReformationTM treats successively
of doctrine, the sacraments, the office of preaching, the episcopal government, etc. It pretends that the bishops ought to be retained—
provided they embrace the new theology! This was a well-known and
favorite dream of Melanchthon’s. He does not speak of forcing new

bishops into office. Notwithstanding the fact that the authors of the
document appeared to be moderate in their language, the pronounce2 The text is most accurately reproduced in Ehses, Concil. Trident., Vol. IV, pp. 364 3qq.;

cfr. Pastor, Geschichte der Pipste, Vol. V (1909), pp. 504 sq.
8 Thus Pastor, l. c., p. 507.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

532

ment characterizes the papacy as “idolatry.” Whatever might savor
of concession is rejected. Only a few external forms of the old Catholic worship are tolerated, mainly as a2 means of deceiving those who

were accustomed to them.*

2. “CONSECRATION’> OF THE BISHOP OF NAUMBURG AND
DEDICATION OF THE CHURCH AT TORGAU

The manner in which Luther at that time intended to proceed with
the installation of bishops for his churches, was exemplified in the
celebrated case of the “consecration” of Nicholas Amsdorf as “Evangelical bishop” of Naumburg.®
The legitimate bishop of this city, Philip, palsgrave of the Rhine
and duke of Bavaria, had died in 1541, after exposing his people entirely too much to the infiltrations of Protestanism. The selection of a
successor precipitated a crisis, owing to the arbitrary and violent
measures taken by the elector, John Frederick of Saxony, who was resolved upon obtaining possession of this ancient and wealthy bishopric. The see of Naumburg was directly subject to the imperial
government and enjoyed the personal protection of the emperor. The
elector’s powers were limited to certain privileges of arbitration. After
Bishop Philip’s death a Lutheran preacher, Nicholas Medler, in compliance with the elector’s instructions, began to function as *‘superintendent of Naumburg” and to deliver sermons in the cathedral.
Soon after ‘the admirable and scholarly provost, Julius von Pflug,
was legitimately elected by the chapter. The elector forcibly prevented Pflug from entering upon his new office. He prosecuted the
conquest of the city and the territory with such vehemence that his
procedure seemed rash even to the Wittenberg theologians. Luther
wrote to the elector: ““What cannot be carried off openly, may be won
by waiting.” Pflug, however, was not recognized as bishop by the
Wittenbergers, who at first intended to erect only a Lutheran consistory in the city of Naumburg, but changed their mind and favored
the appointment of a new bishop by the elector. Up to this time, no
steps had been taken anywhere in Germany towards the direct installation of a Protestant bishop. Melanchthon in particular hesitated to go to such lengths, as his “Wittenberg Reformation” evinced.
#On the “Wittenberg Reformation,” see Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 38 s sqq.; Vol. III,

Pp. 448 sq.

8 For the following see Grisar, op. cit.,, Vol. V, pp. 192 sqq.

“CONSECRATION” OF A BISHOP

5§33

The curious procedure at Naumburg remains practically an isolated
case.

Luther and his friends wanted to force the issue by the election
of Prince George of Anhalt, canon of Magdeburg and Merseburg, who
shared the Wittenberg views. The elector, however, feared that, owing
to his position, this prince might not prove an easy tool in his sov-

ereign’s hands. Not until 1545 did Prince George attain to the “episcopal dignity,” when Luther “consecrated” him bishop of Merseburg,
which see had been occupied in 1541 by August, the brother of Duke
Maurice of Saxony, and had since then been governed by George as
spiritual administrator. The “consecration” of Prince George of An-

halt, besides that of Amsdorf at Naumburg, was the only act of the
kind which Luther performed.®

In lieu of George von Anhalt, the Saxon elector destined Nicholas
von Amsdorf for the see of Naumburg. Amsdorf at the time was actively engaged in preaching Luther’s doctrine at Magdeburg. Luther
thoroughly approved of the appointment and eulogized Amsdorf in a
letter to the elector as “learned and proficient in Holy Scripture, more

so than the whole crowd of papists; also a man of good morals and upright life.” Melanchthon was not so favorably disposed towards this
hot-blooded theologian, nor did he approve of his conduct, but charged
him with having had adulterous relations with the wife of his deacon
at Magdeburg.

In order to give the proceedings connected with the “consecration”

the Protestant councillors of
at Naumburg a semblance of legitimacy,
that city and of Zeitz, and the Protestant members of the gentry,
were asked to vote for Amsdorf. Many of them had sworn everlasting fidelity to the Catholic Chapter under the former bishop. Luther

solved their scruples by advising them that no oath taken by the
sheep to the wolves could be of any account, and that “no duty could
be binding which ran counter to God’s commandment to do away
with idolatrous doctrine.” 7

On January 20, 1542, Luther himself “consecrated” the new Prot-

estant “bishop” in the sacred precincts of the cathedral of Naumburg.
This magnificent structure, one of the most beautiful medieval cathe-

drals of Germany, a noble type of the later Romanesque and Gothic
style, was begun as carly as 1045 under Bishop Cadalus, and through
® I1bid., pp. 193 sq.

7 Kostlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, Vol. II, pp. 554 sq.

534

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

the mouths of its numerous and wonderful statues of saints and pious
princes seemed to utter a loud protest against the unheard-of proceedings within its walls. Many guests of high rank assembled in the choir
between the magnificent rood-loft, with its richly ornamented passages, and the altar. The elector had arrived two days previously, accompanied by an escort of 200 mounted knights, all clothed in black.
At his side were his brother, John Ernest, and Duke Ernest of Brunswick. The councillors and knights of Zeitz and Naumburg acted as
electors and witnesses. In response to an address by Nicholas Medler,
they signified their choice in the name of the congregation, to which
the people assented by saying “Amen.” Luther deemed it very important to emphasize on this occasion his old idea of the importance
of the congregation in contrast with the arbitrary action of the elector. The entire ceremony was to proceed in accordance with the example of the earliest centuries of the Church, in which the bishop,
as it were, married the congregation of the faithful who had elevated

him. The accompanying ancient rites, however, were omitted; above
all the transfer of legitimate ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the new
“bishop.” In place of the neighboring bishops who, in conformity with
the practice of antiquity, were wont to participate, three superintendents and an apostate abbot were invited to perform the rite of the
laying on of hands. Melanchthon, in his usual weakness, had also complied with the summons to be present.
Luther preached to the superintendents of the Church on the text
of St. Paul, where he teaches that “the Holy Ghost hath placed you
bishops to rule the church of God.” After the sermon Amsdorf knelt
before the altar, surrounded by the four assistants, and the “Veni
Creator” was sung. Luther reminded the future bishop concerning his
episcopal duties, and on the latter giving a satisfactory answer, in
common with the four others, he laid his hands on his head; after this
Luther alone offered a prayer for him. This was followed by the “Te
Deum,” sung in German. The “consecration” took place in 2 manner
similar to the ordination of preachers, namely, by imposition of hands
and prayer.

Shortly after the ceremony Luther wrote to a friend that it was “a
daring act” on the part of the “Heresiarch Luther,” which “will arouse

much hatred, animosity, and indignation against us”; and that he
was hard at work “in hammering out a book on the subject.” ® This
8 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 195.

“CONSECRATION” OF A BISHOP

535

book was to justify the *“consecration” at Naumburg and to present
the procedure as a model. It was composed at the request of the elector
and appeared in 1542, under the title Exempel, einen rechten christ-

lichen Bischof zu weiben (Example How to Consecrate a Genuine
Christian Bishop). In many respects it is opposed to the cautious and

mild “Wittenberg Reformation,” which knows naught of such an
“example of how one might wish to reform bishoprics and organize
bishoprics in a Christian manner.” Luther states in this book that the
new bishop was ordained “without any chrism, without even any
butter, lard, fat, grease, incense, charcoal, or any such-like holy
things.” He dismisses his opponents with insolent remarks, even resorting to language borrowed from the category of human evacuations, and adduces in the following form a list of Catholic apologists:

“Doctor Sow (Eck), Witling, Blockhead, Dr. Dirtyspoon (Coch-

laeus), Lick-dish, Urinal, Heinz, Mainz, etc. Extensive repetitions,
moreover, are characteristic of the book. Luther had evidently overwritten himself. His disgust with life, due to bad health, the forerunner of his fatal sickness, spoiled his work.
In his later correspondence with the new “bishop,” Luther refers to
Amsdorf’s bitter complaint that practically nothing was being done by the
elector to establish order in the ecclesiastical régime of Naumburg. Luther

bewailed with him that the government “so often take rash steps, and then,
when we are down in the mire, snore idly and leave us in the lurch.” * ““All
Germany,” he says, “presents a terrible scene of demoralization and decadence.”

It is Christ’s business to see to this,”” he writes on another occasion, “since

He Himself by His Word has called forth so much evil and such great
hatred on the part of the devil.” In a pseudo-mystical strain he consoles himself and Amsdorf by reflecting that it would be safest to allow oneself to be
“carried along” by the guidance of God, who has created the bishop and

disposed everything that has happened. “The blinder we are, the more God
acts through us.” We can only look forward hopefully to the end of the

world.

Amsdorf, the whilom Catholic priest, found little pleasure in his

episcopal status. He and his preachers received but a meager suste-

nance. Soon after Luther’s death he was deposed as a result of the decisive victory of the imperial forces over the Schmalkaldic League.
9 1bid., p. 197.

536

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

He had to retire to Magdeburg, where he did his best to develop that
city into a strong citadel of ultra-Lutheranism. In Magdeburg he also
wrote his notorious book: “That Good Works are Injurious to Salvation.” 1°

Due to the change of events that followed the battle of Miihlberg,
in which the Protestant forces were defeated, the venerable cathedral
of Naumburg once more decked itself out in festive garments to welcome its legitimate bishop, Julius von Pflug. But the bishopric had
been Protestantized, and Catholics were permitted to celebrate divine

service only in the cathedral at Naumburg and the collegiate church
of Zeitz. A painting in the cathedral, though unfortunately much
damaged, preserves the features of the noble Bishop Pflug, who, after
a life replete with hardships and disappointments, died in 1564 and
was interred in Zeitz. He was particularly saddened by his experiences
with the Augsburg Interim of 1548, in the drafting of which he had
participated. Pflug’s expectation of obtaining papal consent to sacer-

dotal marriages and the lay-chalice, for the sake of reconciling the

non-Catholics, proved futile. Other remedial measures were necessary. It pained him to see how many members of his clergy lived in
concubinage in this era of mental and moral confusion—a fact that
explains the propositions which he himself and others submitted
for the sake of obtaining far-reaching concessions from the Holy
See.

After having been so successful in seizing the bishopric of Naumburg, the elector of Saxony sought to obtain control of that of
Meissen also. Luther and Amsdorf assisted him in this undertaking.
In consequence, a feud (known as the “Wurzer Fehde,” after the

town of Wurzer) arose between him and the youthful Duke Maurice

of Saxony, an adherent of the new religion.!! In order to terminate
the controversy, both parties agreed to divide the spoils. The elector
appropriated that part of the bishopric which lay about Wurzen,

which he forthwith Protestantized, whilst the remaining part, including Meissen, fell to Duke Maurice, who also exercised violence in religious matters. Both in Meissen and in Wurzen treasures of Catholic
art were removed from the churches and dissipated with that brutal
barbarity which was employed against so many churches abounding
19 1bid., p. 198.
11 On the “Wurzer Fehde” and Luther’s attitude toward the same see Grisar’s op. cit.,
Vol. V, pp. 200sqq.

ATTACK UPON COLOGN

E

537

in rare and noble works of art.!? In his feud with

the elector, Luther

denounced Maurice of Saxony as “a mad blood-hound.

reasons, this prince developed such a degree

” For various

of antipathy to Protes-

tantism, that he abandoned the Schmalkaldic League

to gravitate toward the Emperor. As a result,

became all the more intimately allied.

and commenced

the elector and Luther

When, in 1544, John Frederick of Saxony had complet
ed the
castle-church at Torgau on the Elbe, the first newly erected
Protestant church in Saxony, he invited Luther to officiate at its dedicatio
n.
The ceremony, which Luther performed as if he were a bishop, paral-

leled the pseudo-consecration of the Protestant bishop of Naumburg.
The ancient church ritual was set aside for the “service of the Word.”
The intimate participation of the congregation in the act, which
was supposed to take place in the name of the people, was once

more clearly expressed. Luther’s sermon, which replaced the rite of

consecration, was published by Caspar Creutziger (Cruciger).!® In

it he develops, among others, his doctrine that every Christian believer is a priest. He so strongly emphasized the unity of his act with
the congregation that here, too, one is constrained to think of op-

position against the elector. In this address he incidentally ascribes
to the Christian congregation the right of transferring the cele-

bration of Sunday to some other day of the week, if circumstances
demand it. He boldly stated, without fear of contradiction, that

man is the master of the Sunday, not Sunday the master of man.'* Another novelty was the singing of a fugue, composed by John Walther,
which contained the words: “Vive Luthere, vive Melanchthon, vivite
nostrae lumina terrae (Long live Luther, long live Melanchthon, long

live the lights of our earth), with an ostentatious amplification of

their merits.!®

3. ATTACKS UPON THE ARCHBISHOPRIC OF COLOGNE AND THE
DUCHY OF BRUNSWICK

In 1543 Luther joyfully boasted to Duke Albrecht of Prussia that
the archbishopric of Cologne had embraced his Evangel in earnest,
12 For illustrations see Grisar, op. cit., Vol. V, pp. 203 sqq.; II, 352 sq.; Vol. 1V, p.
196; Vol. VI, 277 sq.
:
13 Erlangen ed., Vol. II, pp. 218 sq.; Késtlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. III, pp. 573 sq.
14 Erl, ed., Vol. II, p. 223.
i
15 Text, ibid., p. 219,

8

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

despite the strenuous opposition of the canons of the cathedral, and

that matters were progressing famously in the duchy of Brunswick.!®
Herman von Wied, archbishop and elector of Cologne, was a
worldly-minded man, uninstructed in ecclesiastical matters, of whom
Charles V once said to Philip of Hesse: “Why does he start novelties?

He knows no Latin, and, in his whole life, has only said three Masses,
two of which I attended myself. He does not even understand the
Confiteor. To reform does not mean to bring in another belief or
another religion.” 17

After 1539 Bishop Herman was persuaded by the preacher Peter
Medmann, and still more by Martin Bucer, to effect a change in religion in the archdiocese of Cologne. The powerful resistance which
he encountered in his cathedral chapter as well as in the city council
led Luther to speak of “seven devils, who sit in the highest temple,

whom God will overthrow, who breaks down the cedars of Lebanon.” 18 In the courageous defense of the Catholic cause at Cologne,
three men distinguished themselves: John Gropper, a member of the
secular clergy, a true guiding spirit of the archbishopric in its hour
of danger; Eberhard Billick, the lcarned and indefatigable provincial
of the Carmelites, and Peter Canisius, 2 member of the newly-founded
Society of Jesus.

The situation became critical when Melanchthon, in 1543, settled
at Bonn and, in conjunction with Bucer, devoted his energies to promoting the plans of the misguided archbishop. Melanchthon wrote a
pamphlet against Billick, in which he accuses the Rhinelanders of
“idolatry.” In order to draw the people away from the Church, he,
aided by Bucer, published the so-called “Cologne Reformation,”
whereby he gained over many Catholics. The Catholic leaders on
their part addressed urgent representations against Herman von

Wied to the Holy See, and also endeavored to procure the intervention of the Emperor. Herman von Wied, however, issued a summons for a provincial diet to be held at Bonn on January 6, 1546,
for the purpose of definitely introducing a new form of religion,
which, to the great chagrin of Luther, but conformably with the
designs of Bucer and Melanchthon, was a compound of Lutheranism
and Zwinglianism.
18 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 166.
17 Ibid., V, p. 166.
18 Ibid., p. 233.

ATTACK UPON COLOGNE

539

The youthful Canisius at that time rendered excellent services to
the Church of Cologne, a prelude of his future activity as “Apostle
of Germany.” He sojourned at Cologne with several brethren of his
Order, for the sake of study. When Emperor Charles visited Cologne,
in August, 1545, Canisius, then a deacon, eloquent of speech, well

informed, and courageous, appeared before that monarch at the urgent importunities of Gropper, and warmly requested him to protect

the religion of his Rhenish subjects. The ensuing exhortations and admonitions of the Emperor had no influence upon the archbishop.

Before the assembly of the dreaded diet of Bonn, Canisius, already
highly esteemed by the citizens of Cologne, was asked to make a
hurried trip to the Netherlands, to plead with the Emperor for assistance. He succeeded in obtaining an order which inhibited the archbishop from making any decision in religious questions prior to the

next diet. Because of the persistent danger, Canisius, in February,
1546, undertook another journey, and visited the Emperor at Nymwegen, the birthplace of Canisius. In the name of Cologne, he re-

quested the removal from the city of certain clamorous adherents of
Archbishop Wied, and an imperial letter to the magistrates, encourag-

ing them in their opposition to the religious innovation.'® The efforts
of the Catholic leaders of Cologne resulted in the deposition and ex-

communication of the Archbishop on April 16, 1546. After this
Herman von Wied disappears from history. He was succeeded by a
zealous Catholic, Adolf von Schaumburg. Cologne was saved to

the faith and continued to be a citadel of the Catholic religion and
the heart of the Catholic Rhineland. In the same year, 1546, the year
of Luther’s death, Canisius, who was afterwards canonized by the
Church, was ordained to the priesthood and published a Latin edition
of the works of St. Cyril of Alexandria and a revised text of the
writings of Pope St. Leo the Great, in order to demonstrate the traditional teaching of the Church.

In Northern Germany, Duke Henry of Brunswick-Wolfenbiittel
was the militant leader of the Catholic league against the Schmalkaldians. This position made him highly obnoxious to Luther and his

friends, but their hatred was augmented by his defense of the Cath-

olic cause in writing. His forceful attacks upon the bigamous mar-

19 The visits of P. Canisius to the Emperor are mentioned by O. Braunsberger, Pefrus

Canisius, 2nd and 3rd ed., 1921, p. 32. Relative to the last journey, Braunsberger remarks,
without indicating his source: “first revealed through the latest researches.”

540

THE ECCLESIASTICAL SCHISM

riage of Philip of Hesse provoked Luther to write his pamphlet
«“Wider Hans Worst,” which was directed against Duke Henry.

Luther followed this up with a bitter incitement against the “blood-

hound and incendiary Heinz,” as he styled the militant Duke.
For the rest, his criticism of the private life of Duke Henry was

not unfounded. Not only his controversial methods, but also his
moral character were quite objectionable. But the charge of arson in

the territories of the new religion, which Luther made against him,
was the product of a morbid imagination.?° It is rumored, he says, that
“Heinz” has dispatched “many hundreds of incendiaries against the
Evangelical estates.” He maintained in all seriousness “that the Pope

is said to have given 80,000 ducats towards it.”” History is ignorant

of any such transaction. Certain alleged confessions extorted on the

rack have no significance.

In 1542, when Duke Henry attempted to enforce the ban which
the Imperial Supreme Court had declared against the city of Goslar,
the war which the Elector of Saxony and the Landgrave of Hesse had
long prepared against him, finally broke out. Luther was aware at
that time of prophecies which foretold the end of the “son of perdition,”—a “warning example, instituted by God, for the tyrants
of our time.” 2! The two allied Protestant princes took possession of
the Duke’s territory and committed many atrocities. They introduced
Protestantism there with the aid of Luther and especially Bugenhagen.
Due to Henry’s determination to regain his principality, a new war
broke out in 1545, which ended in even more striking success for his
enemies, who took the Duke captive.
When, in deference to the Emperor, Philip of Hesse and others

favored the release of Duke Henry, Luther published an open letter
to Philip and the elector,? in which he characterizes the idea of
setting free that “mischievous, wild tool of the Roman idol,” as an
open attack not merely on the Evangel, but even on the manifest will of God, as clearly displayed in the recent war, which had

been waged “by His angels.” In this remarkable document Luther
rose to the pinnacle of his morbidly mystical conception of life: God
Himself has kindled this conflagration against his adversaries, God,
who calls Himself a consuming fire. His friends, as well as he, had
20 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 293 sq.

21 Gp, cit., Vol. V, p. 236.
22Erl. ed,, Vol. XXVI, ii, pp. 2515qq.; De Wette, Briefe, VI, pp. 385 sqq. Cfr. Grisar,

Luther, Vol. V, pp. 394 sq.

ATTACK UPON COLOGNE

541

always prayed and clamored for peace, but “the pope and the papists
would gladly see us all dead, body and soul, whereas we for our part

would have them all to be body and soul happy, together with us.” 23
Luther represents this document as his own exclusive and personal affair. “Nevertheless,” says Kostlin-Kawerau, “it is not to be doubted”
that Luther “performed a task that had been ordered with the intention of influencing the Landgrave.” 2* Chancellor Briick had inspired
him with the ideas set forth in that document, for it was extremely important to the elector to prevent the release of Duke Henry.
The last armed champion of the Catholic cause in Northern Germany succumbed with Henry of Brunswick. Not until the Schmalkaldic War of 1547, after Luther’s death, did a favorable change
come, at least temporarily.
23 1bid., p. 395.
24 Kostlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, Vol. II, p. 61z.

CHAPTER XX

LUTHER’S FINAL STRUGGLES AND DEATH
I. THE MILITANT SPIRIT OF LUTHER IN WORD AND PICTURE

During the first half of the forties, the thought of death frequently
engaged the mind of Luther. His apprehension was most strongly expressed on November 10, 1545, When he celebrated his sixty-first
birthday in the circle of his friends, Melanchthon, Bugenhagen, Cruciger, Major, Paul Eber, and some others, who surrounded him at
the festive board. He said then that he would not live to see Easter
and spoke sorrowfully of the future apostasy of certain brethren,
which would inflict a blow upon the Gospel greater than any of which
the papists were capable, who, for the most part, were rude, ignorant
Epicureans. He spoke of his impending death in a similar vein, though
less definitely, in his declining years.

And yet these years furnish an exemplification of the incessant
activity of this man, who was afflicted with melancholia. His literary
productions, some of which have already been noted above, must be
considered first.

With his impetuous pen he commenced a vigorous onslaught on
the Jews and the Jewish religion. In the first years of his public
career he had spoken of them in a different tone. At that time, as we
have seen above, he harbored the seductive idea that they might be
converted to the new Evangel. His treatise of 1523 was inspired by
this visionary idea.! The acceptance of his Gospel on the part of the
Jews was to be a divine seal of approval. But his expectations came
to naught. As a result, indignation at their infidelity, their blas-

phemies against Christianity, and their oppression of non-Jews in
Germany, took hold of him. With the sanction of Luther, John
Frederick expelled the Jews from electoral Saxony in 1536, whilst
King Ferdinand granted them an asylum in his territories.
Luther first proceeded against the infidelity and proselytizing zeal
1 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 4113sq.
542

