CHAPTER V

FROM THE INDULGENCE THESES TO THE DISPUTATION
AT LEIPSIC (1517-1519)

I. THE

CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

In consequence of recent researches on the development of Luther,
far less significance is to be attached to the celebrated controversy
on indulgences which followed the theses of 1§17, than tradition
has ascribed to it. The ninety-five theses nailed to the door of the
Wittenberg castle-church do not mark the commencement of the
Protestant Reformation. As we have heard Luther himself intimate,
the initium evangelii is to be sought in the new theology of Wittenberg and in the public movement which it created. The controversy
concerning indulgences simply caused the movement to assume universal proportions. It placed the monk Luther upon the stage of
the world and offered him an opportunity of gradually unveiling
his revolutionary doctrine before all his contemporaries.

There was no room for indulgences in a system of grace and
justification which attacked the meritoriousness of good works and
the value of atonement.
Even before these ideas had fully matured (July 27, 1516), Luther

delivered a sermon in which he expressed himself correctly on the

Catholic doctrine of indulgences. Succeeding ages could have been
benefited by his instructions. He correctly emphasized that an indulgence is not a remission of the guilt of sin, but “a remission of
the temporal punishment due to sin, which the penitent would have
to suffer, be it that it was imposed by the priest, be it that he had
to suffer for it in purgatory.” “In the gaining of a [plenary] indulgence, therefore,” he says in conformity with the belief of the
age in which he lived, “one may not then and there feel sure of

salvation.” “Only those gain a plenary remission of punishment who
have become reconciled to God by true contrition and confession.”

At that time Luther still knew and appreciated the value of indul89

90

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

gences for the dead. The application of these, he explains in the same

sermon, is made by way of intercession; hence a complete redemption of souls in each instance is not to be assumed. The foundation
of indulgences he correctly states in these words: “They are the
merits of Christ and His Saints [i. e., they derive their efficacy from
this treasury of merits], and we must, therefore, esteem them with
all due reverence.” Whatever abuses may have crept in, he holds
that it is “most useful that indulgences should be offered and
gained.” !

The abuses indicated by Luther had reached a certain crisis in his
day. Since good works are requisite for the gaining of an indulgence,
and since it was customary at that time to require a small donation
to be made to some pious or useful purpose, to procure delivery of
the briefs of indulgence, indulgences were frequently made the
means of collecting money. Exaggerated recommendations and avaricious practices combined to degrade them. The so-called guaestores,
who wandered about plying this trade, were the chief culprits.? But
many ecclesiastical superiors were also guilty of having increased
the evil in the temple of the Lord by distributing indulgences with
all too temporal trimmings and worldly bustle.
The extent to which even the papal curia went, may be seen

in the case of the indulgences granted by Leo X, the proceeds of
which were intended for the construction of St. Peter’s basilica
at Rome. This indulgence provided Luther, who had already drifted
away from the Church, with an occasion for entering the lists against

indulgences as such, and not merely the abuse of them.
Bishop Albrecht of Brandenburg, who governed the dioceses of
Magdeburg and Halberstadt, a thoroughly worldly-minded ecclesiastic, had succeeded in having himself elected archbishop of Mayence.
In order to unite these three bishoprics in one hand, he had to contribute no less than 10,000 ducats to the Roman curia. In addition
to this, he was obliged to pay 14,000 ducats for the confirmation
of his appointment as archbishop of Mayence and for the pallium.
It was agreed that he might preach the indulgence for the con-

struction of St. Peter’s basilica throughout his extensive jurisdic1 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, pp. 324 sq. On the origin and the early development of indulgences cf. the excellent work of N. Paulus, Geschichte des Ablasses im Mittelalter, 3 vols.,
Paderborn, 1922~1923.

2 N. Paulus, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 265 sqq., Vol. IIl, pp. 450 sqq., 471 $qq.

THE CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

91

tion in Germany, retaining one-half of the proceeds to reimburse

himself for the 10,000 ducats, which he had borrowed from the
Augsburg firm of the Fuggers, whilst the other half was to be de-

voted to the erection of St. Peter’s at Rome. Albrecht kept a sharp
eye on the filling of the big indulgence chest which accompanied
the preachers and was placed under the supervision of the Fuggers.

It was a rather disedifying transaction. Even if it did not involve
simony, strictly speaking, it was nevertheless reprehensible, and can

be explained only as a result of the evil financial practices of the
time, which had taken root also in Rome, and of the activities of the
agents of Albrecht and an avaricious party of Florentine churchmen

at the curia.?

Only gradually did Luther become aware of these agreements. The
first motive of his intervention was supplied by his exasperation
at the new indulgence enterprise and at the existing abuses in general.
He personally witnessed an example of the general decline of the
system of indulgences. In the castle-church the Elector of Saxony,
Frederick “the Wise,” kept a casket of relics, partly genuine
and partly spurious, for which he succeeded in obtaining incredibly
rich indulgences from Rome. Like the Elector Albrecht of Brandenburg, Frederick was a passionate collector of relics. Both were eager
to have each relic enriched with great indulgences, so as to attract
pious votaries and realize handsome profits at the annual exhibition. Up to the year 1518, Frederick succeeded in obtaining for his
sacred casket in the castle-church of Wittenberg indulgences which
amounted, all told, to 127,799 years.
Princely interests played a nefarious rdle in connection with the

indulgence traffic of the Roman curia. Occasionally the rulers prohibited the too frequent indulgence-preaching within their territories, because they wished to prevent the flow to Rome of money
which they needed for their own countries, or its expenditure for
other purposes not agreeable to them. Thus the Elector Frederick
prohibited the promulgation of the Mayence indulgence in behalf

of St. Peter’s within the confines of his principality.
Elector Albrecht selected John Tetzel, a popular orator of the
Dominican Order, to preach the indulgence at Mayence. Tetzel was
not much of a theologian. His morals were beyond reproach, de8 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1, pp. 347 sqq.

92

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

spite the slanders to which he was subjected in the ensuing controversy. In his sermons, which were attended by large numbers of
people, he adhered to the explicit directions of the ecclesiastical
authorities of Mayence, although he was unable to abstain from
rhetorical exaggerations. The directions of the Mayence authorities adequately emphasized that an indulgence is a remission of punish-

ment, not of sin, and expressly required a contrite confession as a
condition. In one respect, however, the directions were defective. They
declared that an indulgence applicable to the dead became efficacious
upon the performance of the prescribed good work, regardless of
whether one was in the state of sanctifying grace or not. Some theologians held this opinion and it was embodied in several other episcopal
instructions. The problems arising from the Church’s teaching on in-

dulgences had not yet all been clearly solved. The very nature of
indulgences had not yet been dogmatically defined. It was a matter of
practice, taught by the theologians; but its genuineness was warranted
by the ordinary teaching authority of the Church (magisterium ec-

clesiae ordinarium) .

Tetzel eagerly availed himself of the above-described, now abandoned, opinion concerning indulgences for the departed. It cannot
be proved that he used the famous saw which has been attributed
to him: “As soon as money in the casket rings—The soul its flight
from Purgatory wings,” but in substance his words approximated
the proverb. Some critics looked with disfavor on Tetzel because
he often, e. g., at Annaberg, availed himself of the occasion of fairs

with their secular amusements to proclaim the papal indulgence.*
There is an unwarranted report to the effect that when Staupitz
had apprised him at Grimma of Tetzel’s conduct, Luther exclaimed:
“I shall put an abrupt stop to this, please God.” When Tetzel, in
the course of his preaching tour, had arrived at the confines of the
electorate and in the vicinity of Wittenberg, Luther decided that
the time for intervention had come. On November 1, the castlechurch at Witténberg celebrated its titular feast. The church was
dedicated to All Saints and was specially indulgenced for that day.
Many worshipers were sure to attend. On the eve of All Saints, Luther
caused a Latin placard containing ninety-five theses on the subject of
4 Cf. N. Paulus, Jobann Tetzel, der Ablassprediger, Mayence, 1899; Grisar, Luther, Vol.
I, pp. 341 sq.; Vol. IV, pp. 84 sq.

[

D

THE CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

indulgences to be nailed to the door of the church, which was, at

same time, the university chapel.

93

the

The placard contained an invitation to a disputation. At first the
Latin placard did not attract much attention except among scholars.

But when Luther sent copies of it to the theologians of the neighboring universities of Leipsic, Frankfort on the Oder, and Erfurt,
his theses began to attract attention. That they “spread throughout
Germany in fourteen days” is “an erroneous representation, based
on a later expression of Luther.” 5 It is in keeping with the fables

which have accumulated around the history of the theses. It is true
that many, including well-intentioned but short-sighted Catholics,

rejoiced that a courageous protest had been raised against the prev-

alent abuses in connection with the preaching of indulgences. Under
the pressure of these abuses, the true meaning and import of the

theses were easily overlooked.
Luther’s placard was a challenge to a disputation designed to clarify a set of theses which constituted a fundamental, though guarded,
attack on the Catholic doctrine of indulgences. The author had no

intention of abandoning them in a learned discussion. His theological

position would not permit of this. But he did not allow his novel
dogmatic teaching, which stood behind the 95 theses, to appear on
the surface. He maintained in his theses that indulgences were invalid before God, but were to be regarded only as a remission of the
canonical penances imposed by the Church. He denied the doctrine
of the treasury of merits earned by Christ and the saints, which
constitutes the presupposition of indulgences. In addition to other
erroneous views he expresses false notions about the condition of the
departed. In defense of his attitude he seeks to place the absurdities
of the indulgence preachers in the forefront as the reason and the sub-

ject of his theses. He goes so far as to say: “Let him who contradicts
the truth of the papal indulgences be anathema and accursed”; and:
“Bishops and priests are obligated to receive the commissioners of
the papal indulgences with all due reverence.” One sneering thesis

asks: “Why does not the pope build the basilica of St. Peter with his
own money, rather than with that of the poor, seeing that he is
wealthier to-day than the richest Creesus?” Towards the close he
clothes his own sharp objections ih the artificial garb of a suggestion
to the effect that the objections of the laity against the pope and the
5 Paul Kalkoff, Luther und die Entscheidungsjahre der Reformation, 1917, p. 22.

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

94

eleemosynary system ought to be clearly and thoroughly refuted,

adding that “if sermons were preached after the mind and intention
of the pope, these difficulties would be solved.” In this manner the
author of the theses thought he could, in a measure, safeguard his

position.

Not to omit Mysticism, the last theses enjoin the obligation of

striving not for the peace which indulgences seem to bring, but for
the cross. Not pax, pax, should be the watchword, but crux, crux.
“Christians must follow their Leader through suffering, death, and
the pains of hell” (per poenas, mortes, infernosque). This corresponds

with the idea, likewise expressed in the theses, that it is better volun-

tarily to suffer the penalties of sin than to escape them by means of indulgences. He also proclaimed (which was a general truth valid in
all ages), that a Christian’s entire life, according to the will of Christ,

should be one continuous atonement.

The celebrated 95 theses are not a candid or an honest document.
Neither are they a scientifically constructed or properly co-ordinated
whole. Least of all, are they the programme of a reformation, as they
are often represented to be.
The movement gradually assumed great dimensions. On the sixteenth of January, 1518, the eve of the feast of the dedication of the
castle-church, Luther delivered in that church a sermon on indulgences
which was in conformity with his theses.®
In a letter to Staupitz he laments in exaggerated language that
“godless, false, and heretical doctrines” were propounded with such
confidence in sermons on indulgences, that objectors were forthwith

declared worthy of the stake. He, on the contrary, had modestly
advanced his deviating opinions, which were “founded on the conviction of all the doctors and the entire Church, that it is better to
make atonement than to seek for satisfaction by means of indulgences.” Thereby he had invited the frightful wrath of the fanatical
representatives of papal authority. 7
We must not overlook the fact that some months before the publication of Luther’s theses, Karlstadt had published 152 theses in conformity with the new doctrine. It seems Luther did not wish to be
outstripped by his audacious friend. The controversy concerning in® N. Paulus in the Zeitschrift fiir kath. Theologie, 1924, pp. 630 5qq.
7 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 198,

THE CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

95

dulgences, moreover, afforded him an opportunity of assuming the
leadership of the Wittenberg movement in a popular field.
Soon after the posting of his theses, Luther wrote to the Archbishop
of Mayence and to Jerome Schultz (Scultetus), bishop of Brandenburg, to whose jurisdiction Wittenberg was subject, in order to give an
account of the events as he saw them. Archbishop Albrecht was also
informed by the Dominicans, Tetzel and the brethren of his Order,

and, for the sake of his own indulgence, immediately brought the
matter before the supreme tribunal of the Church at Rome, by submitting a copy of the 95 theses and those of the disputation of September 4, 1517. Thereupon, on February 3, 1518, an Augustinian,
Gabriel della Volta, was commissioned by Leo X, as representative

of the General of the Augustinians, to charge Luther’s
superiors with the task of severely dissuading him from his perverted

opinions, “lest a greater conflagration ensue as a result of negli-

gence.” It cannot be proved that the Pope originally styled the controversy an empty “quarrel between monks.” Strict orders were issued by Della Volta to Staupitz, who, however, was not inclined to
adopt thorough-going measures—an attitude which can easily be ex-

plained in view of his previous relations with Luther. Luther confi-

dently wrote to him on March 31, 1518: “When God acts, no one

can prevent Him; when He rests, no one is able to awaken Him.” 8
Della Volta meanwhile summoned him to appear before the imminent

chapter of his Order at Heidelberg, to give an account of himself.

There a district vicar was to be selected to succeed him, since his
three years’ term of office had expired.

On the other side Tetzel and the Dominicans were not satisfied
with a defense of their preaching. At Frankfort on the Oder, Tetzel
published a series of theses on the doctrine of indulgences, which
were couched in a moderate form and, generally speaking, correctly
reflected the position of the Church. They were composed by Conrad
Wimpina, a professor of that city, who afterwards became a literary
opponent of Luther. Maintaining his position, Luther replied in a

pointed sermon on indulgences and grace. Tetzel defended himself,
again in a moderate form, in a printed “representation,” in which
he stressed Luther’s violation of the papal authority. He published a
second series of theses, which, in turn, were followed by Luther’s
8 Bricfwechsel, 1, p. 176.

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

96

booklet entitled: “Freedom of a Sermon on Indulgences.” ® It was
written in 2 more provocative tone than Luther had thus far used.
The first outsider to enter the lists was Dr. John Eck, who was

destined to achieve celebrity in his subsequent controversy with
Luther. He was a professor of the university of Ingolstadt, a quick-

witted humanist and theologian. He circulated “Obelisci,” 4. e., anno-

tations to Luther’s theses in manuscript. Luther replied with
“Asterisci,” which were also originally circulated in manuscript

form.

As the time for the chapter at Heidelberg approached, April, 1518,
Luther undertook to safeguard his position. In the event of his refusal to recant, he had to fear that he would be delivered up to the
ecclesiastical authorities—for such was the procedure of medieval
jurisprudence—and in the event of obstinacy would be confronted
with the severest ecclesiastical penalties, He procured from the
Elector Frederick of Saxony an order for his unmolested return to
Wittenberg. It was the first demonstration in behalf of Luther on the
part of that ruler, whose friendship was destined to increase with the
coming years.

The members of the chapter, or at least a majority of them, were
favorably inclined towards Luther and the result of their deliberations was a verdict in favor of the defendant. It was a result entirely
contrary to the expectations of the Roman authorities of his
Order. 1° He was even granted the privilege of arranging a great
disputation in the auditorium of the Augustinian monastery, which
was conducted by Leonard Beier,

2 Wittenberg master. University

professors and many guests attended. Beier and Luther argued against

free will and the ancient theology. One of the Wittenberg professors who were in attendance interrupted the disputants when certain
strong declarations were made, exclaiming: “If the peasants could

hear this, they would stone you!” The Heidelberg chapter, so far as
can be inferred, did not treat the problem of indulgences. Luther,
now regarded as a courageous ornament of his Order, remained

unmolested. Among the students of theology at the university, several were more or less won over by him. Some of them later on became
?On the correspondence between Luther and Tetzel see Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, PP372 5qq., where the calm and heavy publications of Tetzel are compared with Luther’s

first impetuous polemical broadsides.

10 Grisar, Lutbher, Vol. I, p. 334.

THE CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

97

his helpers, such as John Brenz and Erhard Schnepf, and particularly
Martin Butzer (Bucer), a talented young Dominican endowed with a
very lively temperament.
On his homeward journey, Luther, who was delighted with the
issue, delivered a sermon in Dresden in the presence of Duke George

of Saxony and his court. He discoursed on the grace of Christ, eternal
salvation, and the conquest of fear before an angry God. The duke,
who was loyal to the Church, took great offense at these remarks.
Several others also were indignant. When Luther heard of their objections, he disposed of them in these self-conscious words: These

babblers desire everything and can do nothing; they are “a serpent’s

brood,” “masked faces” whom I will ignore.??

His arrogance increased because of his having escaped punishment,
because of the approval he met with, and because of the expected
protection of the Elector Frederick. At the same time his writings
and letters of those days reveal how he ever and anon calls up before
his mind the abuses actually existing within the Church, especially
the lucrative practices of the bishops and the Roman curia, in order
to encourage himself and excite his anger. Unfortunately, the abuses

furnished him with what he wanted. Oldecop, who was his pupil at
that time, thus describes Luther’s attacks which he continued at home,
on the indulgence traffic and the doctrine of indulgences itself:
“In his teaching against them, he exceeded all bounds, indulging in
every kind of rage and blasphemy.” He describes him on this occasion

as “naturally proud and presumptuous.” In a statement on indulgences and grace, composed at the behest of members of the Heidelberg chapter, Luther assured them that in his theses on indulgences
he had spoken only by way of disputation, to ascertain the truth.
In this way he constantly concealed his real opinion. However, in
the “Resolutions” which he published in connection with his theses
he expressed his attitude unequivocally. These Resolutions or “explanations” were intended to elucidate, defend, and confirm the entire
series of theses. No dogmatic definition on indulgences having been
issued, he pretended that there was no binding doctrine on the subject proposed by the magisterium ordinarium of the Church. He
now proclaimed to the world his new doctrine on grace in a more

definite outline.’> He conceived the bold idea of dedicating his
11 1bid., p. 335.

4 1bid., pp. 335, 378 8q.

98

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

“Resolutions” to Pope Leo, and of forwarding them to Rome through
Staupitz. He prefaced the work with an humble dedicatory epistle
addressed to the head of the Church. Couched in superlative phraseology, it was designed to be an apologia of his conduct and an attack on his opponents. True, he tersely says: “I cannot recant,” but
towards the end of the epistle he bursts forth with the assurance:
“Most Holy Father! I prostrate myself before thy feet, and offer
myself to thee with all that I am and possess. Do as thou wilt; give
life or death, call or recall, approve or disapprove; I will acknowledge
thy voice as the voice of Christ who reigneth and speaketh in thee.
If T have merited death, I shall not refuse to die.” ®* How is this
language to be explained? It constitutes one of the many riddles of

his psychology. It need not be taken as hypocrisy, but is, rather, a
reflection of the restless and profound struggles which buffeted him
about between loyalty to the Church and the new position which
he had assumed. It is possible that he wished to dispose the pope
favorably and he may also have intended to allay the alarm of his
many Catholic readers both at home and abroad. Nevertheless, a con-

siderable lack of spiritual equilibrium is plainly noticeable. When
his imagination is deeply roused, the ideas which agitate him at the
moment often assume most exaggerated forms, but later are in turn

easily displaced by contrary and equally vivid ideas. Concerning the
pangs of conscience which afflicted him at the beginning of his re-

volt, he expressed himself thus on one occasion: “I was not happy
or confident concerning that undertaking.”— “What my heart suf-

fered in the first and second year, and how I lay prostrate on the

ground, nay, almost despaired, they [my opponents] did not know,

who themselves afterwards attacked the pope with equal audacity.”

They were, he said, “ignorant of the cross and of Satan,” whereas
he “was compelled to go through terrible death-struggles and

temptations.”

In a remarkable passage of the “Resolutions” he describes these

phenomena in detail, though he is not aware that his qualms of con-

science are closely related to the neurotic precordial fear which he

frequently suffered.

Apropos of indulgences for the departed, he wishes to picture the spiritual
agonies of the souls in Purgatory, which were understood
very well by such
131bid., p. 335; Briefwechsel, 1, pp, 200 sq.

THE CONTROVERSY ON INDULGENCES

99

as at one time or another had suffered similar pains, but of which the indulgence-preachers had no conception. Then he proceeds in fantastic langauge: That eminent doctor [Tauler] with whom the Scholastic theologians
are not familiar, speaks of such “dark nights of the soul”; and he himself
is

acquainted with one so afflicted (i e., himself; 2 Cor. XII, 2).
The agonies are very brief, but so intense and infernal that no tongue

can

express,

no

pen

can

describe,

no

wuninitiate

can

believe

them.

Were they to last but the tenth part of an hour, all of a2 man’s bones would
be reduced to ashes. “God, and simultaneously with Him, all creation,

appears horribly angry. There is no escape, no comfort, whether within or
without, only a hollow accusing voice.” The sufferer regards himself as a

reprobate, and does not even dare to say with the Psalmist: O Lord, rebuke
not me in Thy indignation. He believes that he is saved, but suffers eternal
punishment, and feels himself stretched on the cross with Christ, so that

all his bones are numbered. There is not a nook of the soul that is not filled
with bitter anguish, with terror, dread and sadness, accompanied by the

stifling sense that it is to last forever. In order to make a weak comparison:

when a bullet traces a line, every point in that line sustains the whole bullet,
but it does not compass the whole bullet. Thus the soul feels when that
deluge of eternity flows over it and drinks naught else but eternal pain;

but this pain does not abide; it passes away. It is an infernal torture, an
intolerable terror which excludes all consolation! Those who have experienced it must be believed.'*

This is the language of a sick man. Here Luther actually depicts
those phobias of traumatic neurosis which nervous persons experience
as a result of a terrible shock. We must regard them as after-effects
of the thunderbolt of Stotternheim. In his own opinion they were
that darkness of soul so familiar to mystics. In his case physical
fear was intimately associated with tortures of conscience, his in-

ternal doubts and that abiding sense of fear, in which he imagined
God to be “horribly angry.” In their most aggravated form, they
were movements of precordial fear. Such psychopathic conditions
were not adequately known to the medical science of his day. It was
no pressure of circular “psychosis” which affected Luther in his
monastic years, as a popular Protestant biographer would have us
believe, who holds that monastic practices as such, when strictly and
conscientiously performed, ordinarily induce a certain degree of
14 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, pp. 381 sq.; VI, 102; Werke, Weimar ed., I, p. 5575 Opp. Lat.

Var., 11, p. 180.

100

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

insanity.!® Insanity cannot be ascribed in any sense to Luther W}-xile
he was a monk. If one correctly understands his manifold testimonies,
he simply experienced the effects of extreme nervousness from early
youth to old age.
The “Resolutions” were followed by a tract on the “Force of Excommunication.” It was inspiréd by anxiety about the condemnatory

verdict of the pope. In order to allay his own fears as well as the
fears of others, he wished to show that an unjust excommunication
does not separate one from the soul of the Church. To justify his
conduct he describes in lurid colors the abuses which attended the
all too frequent use of the power of excommunication by the bishops.
2.

THE

HEARING AT AUGSBURG.

MILTITZ

The German Dominicans reported to the Roman curia fresh ac-

cusations against the impetuous Augustinian. A certain rivalry be-

tween these two great and influential bodies may have to some extent
prompted this procedure; but it was not the decisive motive. Older

Catholic authors, relying too confidently on contemporaneous verdicts, have mistakenly endeavored to trace the origin of the religious

schism to the jealousy that existed between the Dominican and the

Augustinian orders, inasmuch as the former espoused the cause of
Tetzel and his indulgence sermons, whereas the latter rose in defense
of Luther and his courageous utterances. Whatever may have been in

the background, as far as the attitude of Rome was concerned, the
documents which were before the papal curia, namely, the Wittenberg theses, the disputations conducted there, the Heidelberg theses
of Luther, and his “Resolutiones,” decided the issue.
The Pope, acting in conformity with the law, through his fiscal

procurator and the auditor of the camera, cited Luther to
Rome,

where he was to present himself within sixty days. At the same time,
the theologian of the sacred palace (magister sacri palatii),
the
Dominican Sylvester Mazzolini, a native of Prierio (therefore
called
Prierias) , was entrusted with the task of preparing an expert
opinion.
As he had evidently been exactly informed of the case some
time
before, he completed his task within three days. His printed
opinion
was a complete apologia for Tetzel and his teaching on indulgen
ces.
18 Adolph Hausrath; cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1, p. 383.

THE HEARING AT AUGSBURG

101

He employed unnecessarily bitter expressions against Luther—following a custom in vogue in those times of controversies against heretics. He placed special emphasis on the power of the pope and his right

of definitively deciding all ecclesiastical questions, which he set forth

in most forceful terms.’® When Sylvester’s pamphlet with the citation

to Rome reached Luther, he realized to his consternation, as he tells
us, how serious the situation really was. He made a hasty, all too
hasty, decision and published an indignant response (Responsio) to

Prierias.” Relative to the citation, he on the very next day issued a
written appeal for help to the Elector, requesting that dignitary
to insist that the case be tried in Germany. Frederick “the Wise”
was in attendance at the diet of Augsburg at the time.

This diet was also attended by the papal legate, Cardinal Cajetan
de Vio, a highly respected Dominican theologian. The Elector told

him that he would not let his university professor go to Rome. In

the meantime (August 9), the Emperor Maximilian had sent a
vigorous letter to the Pope, assuring him that he would execute the
decision of the Holy See against Luther with all his energy. Luther’s
efforts to prevent this course had proved futile. Assured of imperial support, the curia decided to accelerate the procedure against

the growing evil. It was also intended to comply with the request of
the Elector to have the hearing conducted in Germany in order to
secure the help of this powerful prince in the war against the Turks.
For this reason Cardinal Cajetan received orders from Rome to
summon Luther to appear before him in person to recant his errors.

The order was accompanied by another, to the effect that Luther,
in the event of his refusal to recant, should be apprehended forthwith and delivered to the Roman authorities. The Elector and the
provincial of the Saxon Augustinians received simultaneous orders
to assist in apprehending Luther in case such a measure should become necessary. On September 11, the legate received a further
document from Rome, empowering him to conduct the case against
Luther according to his own discretion.

:

Luther appeared before Cajetan at Augsburg, on October 12.

The first hearing and the subsequent meetings were fruitless. With
moderation and dignity Cajetan demanded the retraction of two
theses of Luther’s: one denying the treasury of merits gained by
18 Op. cit., Vol. 1V, pp. 373 sq.
17 Op. cit., Vol. 1V, 374 sq.

102

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

Christ and the Saints, which was the foundation of the doctrine of

indulgences; the other, contained in the “Resolutiones,” asserting
that faith alone renders the Sacraments of the Church efficacious. He
disregarded the other theses because, although false, they did not
so patently offend against theological truths. As to the treasury of
merits, many theologians, among them Cajetan himself, held that it
had already been defined by Pope Clement V1. In any event, like the
independent efficacy of the Sacraments, it constituted an important
doctrine of theology.
Despite

all

his kindness

and

determined

earnestness,

Cardinal

Cajetan’s efforts proved futile. Luther manifested arrogance and of-

fensive obstinacy. Dismissed with the threat of excommunication,
he announced to the Cardinal that he would appeal from his tribunal
“to the Pope, who would be more correctly informed.” To others
he said that this was but a preparation for an appeal to a general

council, which was bound to follow in case the Pope, “in the pleni-

tude of his authority, or rather tyranny,” would reject his appellation. Luther did not tarry for a reply from the hesitating Cardinal, but secretly fled from the city and hastened back to Wittenberg.

The Cardinal had also made advances to the Elector, in order to
influence his attitude regarding the election of a German king in
conformity with the intentions of Rome. Frederick subsequently

asserted that he had obtained from Cajetan the promise that Luther
would be returned to Germany in any event. It is certain that the
scholarly and gentle prince of the Church was no match for the
cunning diplomacy of the Elector.
The formerly popular legend of Cajetan’s haughty treatment of
Luther is now admitted to be unhistorical even by Protestant writers.
The Cardinal is described as “humble, just, and self-sacrificing” and
his conduct towards Luther as dignified; he is admitted to have
been
“an earnest and, in his judgment concerning the abuses prevalen

the curia, a strict and free-spoken thinker.” 18 Luther, on the

t at

con-

trary, accuses him of being “most wofully ignorant”
and of having
treated him like a lion.1?
18 Paul Kalkoff, Luther und die Entscheidungsjahre
, pp. 57, 157; IDEM in Kirchengesch.
Forschungen, E. Brieger dargebracht, 1912, and in the
Theol. Studien und Kritiken, 1917,

P- 246. Similarly Hermelink in the Theol.
Rundschax, 1917, P.

19 Briefwechsel, 1, p. 282.

14I.

THE HEARING AT AUGSBURG

103

The question which now tormented Luther was whether he would
be safe at Wittenberg. He thought of going to Paris, where the

theological faculty of the University was engaged in a quarrel with
Rome. But his friend Spalatin, a preacher at the court of the Elector
Frederick, provided protection through that ruler. Luther entered
into a lively correspondence with Spalatin, through whom he assured
the prince that he would gladly go into exile rather than embarrass
him through the fury of his enemies. In the interim, on November
28, he appeared before a notary and two witnesses, and drew up a
solemn appeal to a general council. In the lengthy formula he declared
his intention to do or say naught against the Roman Church, the
teacher and head of all the churches, nor against the authority of

the Pope—as long as the latter were well advised (bene consultus).
The affidavit was signed, as the subscription of the notary attests, “in

the chapel of Corpus Christi, situated in the cemetery of the parish
church.” The little church was a pretty structure erected in honor
of “Christ’s holy body,” such as adorned many a churchyard in those
days.

Luther’s appeal to an ecumenical council, like his former appeal,
was inadmissible and ineffective. According to canon law, an appeal
to a council was a penal offense. This provision was justified by the
answer to the question: Has any individual who wishes to create a

schism within the Church the right to convoke all the bishops of
the world to a council, prior to his submission?

|

On December 18, the Elector addressed a letter to Cardinal
Cajetan, in which he disclosed to the latter the line of action he had

resolved upon with reference to his protégé, and to which he

always adhered. Luther’s doctrine, he said, had not as yet been proven
heretical; Luther was prepared to appear before a university for a disputation and formal examination; hence, nothing could be done to

him at Wittenberg. But Rome proceeded directly, though, out of
regard for the Elector and his participation in the great questions
of ecclesiastical policy which were then pending, it proceeded with
notable slowness. At first an attempt was made to influence Frederick
by sending him the Golden Rose blessed by the Pope. It was custom-

ary to send it annually to a prince as a mark of distinction. The
presentation was to have been made by the Roman notary and titular
chamberlain, Karl von Miltitz. The selection of this Saxon nobleman
was not a happy one. Miltitz undertook his commission with great

104

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

pomp, but in the end executed it in a very ineffective manner. He was
an incompetent man and a seeker of benefices.

In order to persuade Frederick to deliver up Luther, Miltitz, of

his own accord, adopted wrong methods. In the Dominican monastery at Leipsic he overwhelmed Tetzel with unmerited and bitter
reproaches, which are said to have hastened his death. Luther consented to make a doubtful promise to the importunate agent, who
exceeded his commission, namely, to observe silence if his opponents
did the same. There could be no question of a general silence on the
Catholig side in view of the ever increasing dangers that threatened
the Church; and, on the other hand, Luther was far from expecting
his opponents to observe silence, or from being silent himself. Under
the influence of Miltitz, Luther at that time published a curious work

under the title of “Unterricht” (Instructions), etc., which contained
both affirmations and negations, in order to conciliate his opponents.
Miltitz sent boastful reports of the success of his efforts to the
Roma curia, and they were not entirely devoid of effect. The death
of Emperor Maximilian, on January 12, 1519, and the fact that
Frederick of Saxony had some prospects of becoming emperor, supplied Leo X with a reason for new delays. Finally the Pope, in a friendly
brief (Paterno affectu), issued March 29, 1519, summoned Luther
to Rome to receive personal instructions and abandon his erroneous
doctrines. It cannot be proved that the treatment accorded Luther
was severe and ill-considered. When the brief arrived, steps had already been taken by Luther for the Leipsic disputation, which destroyed every hope of arriving at an understanding. At Rome this
measure occasioned the termination of the trial which had already
been too long drawn out.
Luther’s pen was not exclusively devoted to attacks. With impetuous activity he had in the meanwhile composed a series of tracts
which, beside those mentioned above, were dedicated in part to a
glorification of his cause, and in part written to pastoral require-

ments. His popular religious writings were intended to invest him
with the indispensable reputation of a2 man who was solicitous solely

about the welfare of souls. This activity gained for him a large following among religious-minded people. Among other things he published,
in that period of stress, a serviceable explanation of the Our Father, a

short instruction on confession, a condensed explanation of the
Decalogue, and an interpretation of Psalm CIX (Vulg. CX). Even

THE DISCOVERY IN THE TOWER

10§

before this he had entered the field of popular literature with an
exposition of the seven penitential Psalms, a sermon on the Ten Commandments, and some other smaller writings.
His history of the Augsburg trial (Acfa Augustana), on the other
hand, as well as his edition of the “Replica” of Sylvester Prierias
against his “Responses,” were polemical. By publishing a reprint of
the “Replica” of the Master of the Sacred Palace, he intended to

represent Prierias as a man entirely devoid of importance and worthy
of disdain.??
3.

THE DISCOVERY IN THE TOWER

An essential element was still missing in the new theology, as it
appears in Luther’s exposition of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, in

his early disputations, and in the writings which he had thus far pub-

lished.

He was unable to discover an adequate answer to the distressing
question: How can we be personally certain that Christ’s merits are

imputed to us, and that we are in a state of grace? The Church told
him that whoever sought justification by true penance, should be
certain of it. Faithful souls in a normal state were not tortured by
doubts on this point; but they did not conceive this certitude as
really a certitude of faith in the strict and proper sense, as an
object of revelation, which would have been erroneous. However,

the teaching of the Church and her practice did not satisfy the restless soul of Luther; nor was he content with the results of his own
study. His demand of perfect surrender (bumilitas) to almighty
God, coupled with resignation to whatever He might decree, appeared insufficient even to himself to engender that perfect certainty

of the state of grace for which he longed. The reason was that his
God was the arbitrary God of Ockhamism.

Hence, he conceded, in painful language, the endurance, yea the
increase of his fear of a wrathful and avenging Deity. The word
justitia, he said, had ever persecuted him and often entered into his
soul like a flash of lightning.?! Fear agitated the morbid substratum

of his soul. He assures us that he felt most distressed at the time he
was about to deliver his second series of lectures on the Psalms. It
20 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 375.
21 Op, cit., Vol. I, pp. 374 sqq.

106

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

was synchronous with his appeal to a general council, in the winter
semester of 1518 to 1519. Beginning with 1516, one is able to see
how, step by step, he gradually advances toward the conclusions
which he had laid down in his second exposition of the Psalms,
namely, the dogmatic certitude of personal justification. In the
works which he published in 1518 he confidently announces this
result. The publications which embody this conclusion are the second
commentary on the Psalms (Operationes in Psalmos), the shorter
explanation of the Epistle to the Galatians, and the sermons on “twofold and threefold righteousness.” 22 In what manner did he arrive
at this conclusion? The answer is supplied by the so-called discovery
in the tower.
On various occasions during his later life, Luther spoke freely
of this capital discovery. Thus in the preface to his Latin works,
edition of 1545,% he describes how his discovery in the tower of the
monastery was connected with a passage in the Epistle to the Romans
(I, 17): “For the justice of God is revealed therein [i.e., in the
Gospel], leading men from faith unto faith

[i.e., unto the be-

lieving], according as it is written: The just shall live by faith.”

(CE.Hab, 11, 4).

“Until now,” Luther says in the preface, “the words, ‘the justice
of God is revealed in the Gospel,” were an obstacle to me. For I hated
the words, ‘justice of God,” which I had been taught, in conformity
with the usage and custom of all doctors [!], to comprehend philosophically, namely, of the so-called formal or active justice, by which
God is just and punishes the sinners and the unjust. Although I was
a monk without reproach, I felt myself to be a sinner in the sight of
God, suffered the greatest spiritual unrest, and could not consolingly
imagine God as reconciled by my atonement. Consequently, I did not

love, but rather hated the just God who punished sinners.” The an-

cient law of the Decalogue already threatened sinners with dire punishment, and now, as he understood that passage, God intended to
proclaim His anger and avenging justice through the Gospel. “Thus

I raved (furebam), and my mind conjured up terrors and confusion.

Importunately I sounded the text and thirsted to know its purport.”

While in this frame of mind, the significance of the words, “the just

man liveth by faith,” suddenly became clear to him. He saw that the
22 Op. cit., Vol. 1, pp. 386 sq.

23 Opp. Lat. Var., Erlangen ed., 1, pp. 15 sqq. Cf. Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, pp. 388 sqq.

THE DISCOVERY IN THE TOWER

107

“justice of God” was identical with the justice which the just and
holy God bestows by means of faith upon those who are to be justified and did not denote avenging justice, as everybody else imagined.
He had discovered, not active but passive justice, as he phrases it.
“I felt completely reborn and believed 1 was entering paradise
through open portals. . . . Henceforth I praised the word justice
with as much love as I had formerly pursued it with hatred.” He
concludes that he was confirmed in his interpretation by reading the
works of St. Augustine.

Relative to Luther’s assertions concerning the sequence of these
events, two things should be noted. The assertions were made long
after the event. The most detailed, which we have just cited, was
made twenty-seven years later, after an agitated life spent in controversies. It is natural, therefore, that the revelation he claimed he
had received is no longer as prominent as in other passages of his
writings.2* The definitely expressed content was the alleged efficacy of
faith alone, namely, the absolute certitude of personal justification to
be obtained from “sola fides,” i. e., the confidence engendered by faith.

As a result of his later experiences and owing to the progress of his
doctrines, this idea appears somewhat obscured in Luther’s subsequent
account. The time and place were more clearly fixed in his memory.
It is not true that “all the doctors” up to his time understood Rom.

I, 17, of the avenging justice of God, and that Luther was the first
to perceive the correct meaning of the phrase, namely, the concept
of justice by which God makes men just. This assertion is reiterated
in Luther’s commentary on Genesis and was popularized by Melanchthon in his short biography of the Reformer.?> The very contrary
is true. Denifle has reviewed all the ancient commentators in a
careful monograph 2¢ and shows “that not one Christian commentator

from the days of Ambrosiaster up to the time of Luther, interpreted

the Pauline passage in the sense of an avenging justice or an angry

God, but that all understood it as referring to the justifying God,
His justifying grace, and the former exegetes had spoken of justifica24 Op. cit., Vol. VI, pp. 504 sqq.

25 Commentar. in Genesim, see chap. 27, Opp. Exeg., VII, p. 74. Melanchthon, Vita

Lutheri (Corp. Ref.), VI, p. 159.

leger bis Luther
28 Quellenbelege s Luther und Luthertum: Die abendlindischen Schriftaus
s from 65
quotation
with
380
and
XX
pp.
o,
lustificati
und
17)
I,
(Rom.
Dei
lustitia
iber
exegetes (Mayence, 1905).

108

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

27 Hence, Luther had not made a new discovery,
tion of faith.”
but taught the acquisition of justice in a far different manner. Denifle
also showed how tradition contradicts Luther and corroborates the
ancient teaching of the Church that justification is obtained only

through faith animated by charity (fides caritate formata) and not
through the Lutheran formula sols fide. Luther’s assertion about the
teaching of the ancient commentators can only have originated in the
fact that he had not read, or else had not understood some of them we
know he had read. His subsequent utterance is a sign of the self-delusion into which he gradually fell under the influence of self-interest.
It was while he was somberly meditating on Rom. I, 17, that, at
the end of 1518, his mind was enlightened in a tower at the southeastern corner of the monastery, next to the garden. In the second

story of this tower there was a so-called hypocaust, i. e., a furnaceroom, and beneath it the toilet (cloaca) of the monks. The hypocaust served Luther as a study. ?® He mentions the tower and the
cloaca in 1532, in a passage of his Table Talks, where he speaks of
the place of his illumination. The conversation was recorded by
his pupil and friend, John Schlaginhaufen, who wrote down the short
conversation at table for his private collection of Table Talks. 2°
Schlaginhaufen, since 1531, resided at Luther’s house, the former
Augustinian monastery, as an expectant for a position as pastor. In

the interval between July and September of the following year, Luther spoke in his presence of the terrors he had suffered at the thought
of divine justice. While in the tower, he said, he had pondered the

words: The just man lives by faith. His spirit rose and the conclusion
flashed upon him: Therefore, it is God’s justice which justifies and

saves us. “Those words became more gratifying to me. On this cloaca
the Holy Ghost inspired me with this apt interpretation.”

The two references of Schlaginhaufen to the Holy Ghost and the

tower are repeated in the same connection by other contemporaneous

collectors of Table Talks, who were not present at the conversation,
but had Schlaginhaufen’s manuscript before them. Thus, Conrad
Cordatus reports Luther’s words as follows: “The Holy Ghost inspired

2T Thus Denifle summed up the results of his investigation in Luther und Luthertum,

2and ed., pp. 387 sq.

1

28 E. Kroker in the Archiv fir Reformationsgeschichte, 1920, pp. 300 sqq;
28 Tislcbreden, Weimar ed., II, p. 177, no. 1681, The word cloaca is represented
by the

etters cl.

THE DISCOVERY IN THE TOWER

109

me with this solution in this tower.” 2° He, too, lived in the same house
with Luther, was familiar with the place, and adds in the introduction
to Luther’s words that the “privy” of the monastery was there. George

Rérer, also a pupil of Luther and a most reliable collector of his Table
Talks, quotes Luther as saying: “The spirit of God has inspired me
with this interpretation on the cloaca.” 3* Anton Lauterbach reports
that Luther concluded his description of this event thus: “The Holy
Spirit revealed the Scriptures to me in this tower.” ** The repeated
use of the pronoun “this” permits the inference that it was thought
that Luther indicated the tower with his finger. The hypocaust is
mentioned only by Lauterbach at the beginning of the Table Talk,

thus: “Once when I was reflecting in this tower and hypocaust.” The
question may be raised why he inserted the word bypocaust in
Schlaginhaufen’s story.

It is of little moment, whether the enlightenment came to Luther
in the cloaca itself, as seems to have happened, or in the hypocaust,

which was his study. 3 In fact, it is of even less moment than might
appear from the elaborate discussions of Protestant authors who
favor the elimination of the word cloaca from the narrative. The
matter was quite indifferent to Luther and his aforementioned pupils; only the timid Schlaginhaufen seems to have taken offense at it,
since he does not write out the word in full, but only insinuates it with
the letters cl. That he understood that the cloaca was meant when
Luther pointed out the place, is not subject to doubt, according to the
Protestant author of the new critical edition of the Table Talks,
though some still place a different and deviating interpretation on
the letters cl. 3* Luther, as Kawerau emphasizes, was of the opinion

that the Spirit of God has a free hand everywhere, even on the
cloaca. 3%

Such was Luther’s experience in the tower, of which he later says

30 Jbid., 111, p. 228, no. 3232a.

81 Jbid., II, p. 177, n. 1. Here the word cloace is written out in full.

32 Ipid., I, p. 228, no. 3232c (Bindseil, Colloguia). Likewise Kaspar Khumer (ib. no.

dem Torm gegeben”’
3232b): “Diese Kunst bat mir der Heilige Geist auf dieser cloaca aufnote
34.)
33 Kroker assumes the hypocaust to be the place. ( Jabrbuch etc.; see

assumes that
3¢ Kroker in the Jabrbuch der Luthergesellschaft, I (1919), pp. 112 5qq.,
to be entirely excluded.
Schlaginhaufen had misunderstood Luther. “This possibility is not to
Nevertheless Schlaginhaufen was quite certain, since he preferred conceal : what he had
heard, yet expressed it with cl.

35 G. Kawerau, Luther in katholischer Beleuchtung, Leipsic, 1911, p. 60,

110

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

that for a long time he knew not what he was about, when from the
verse, “The just man lives by faith,” a light burst upon him which terminated one period of his life. “Thereupon,” he says, “I went
through.” 3¢
So much is certain: Luther’s experience in the tower may claim to
be one of the most important
and far-reaching events of his life. In
its essential features it does not permit of contradiction. The feeling
of joy which Luther tells us he experienced immediately after, is
quite comprehensible and does not provoke the least historical objection. Psychologically it is not only possible, but characteristic of the
spirit which moved Luther. Of course, the Catholic ascetic will view

the sudden emotion of joy in quite a different light than Luther’s
admirers.
It is evident to any impartial observer that the new theological
doctrine of the certitude of salvation or, let us rather say, the certainty of justification, was a deduction completely adapted to Luther’s

state of mind, as it soothed him in his sad personal struggle. He
erected it into an article of faith, to be believed by all. That one must

firmly believe that one is in the state of grace became a dogma of the

Lutheran faith.
In a similar manner Luther erected the personal experiences of his

own way of suffering into a general norm for all. Even at that time

he taught—and always adhered to this doctrine—that God leads those

whom He wishes to justify, through darkness and fears; that the
road of despondency per se leads to salvation. On one occasion he
wrote that no man has a right to converse about divine things unless

he has experienced those things, and among those who have not he

classes the papists and the visionaries who deviated from his doc-

trine.

But Luther was not able to maintain himself in the certainty to attain which cost him so much labor. In the sequel he often admitted,

sorrowfully, that this was not possible for him except at the cost

severe trials and ever new struggles.®” He instructed all that life

nothing but a laborious contest for this ineffable good and that

of
is

assurance of grace depends on vigorous endeavors and daring defiance,
which, however, are not everyman’s business.
86 Tischreden, Weimar ed., V, no. ss18,
87 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, Ch, XXXII, especially no.

6.

THE LEIPSIC DISPUTATION OF 1519

188

4. THE LEIPSIC DISPUTATION OF I§I19 AND THE
PAPAL PRIMACY

After Luther’s trial at Augsburg, the controversy about indulgences
began to wane before other more important questions connected with
his revolt. Among these the primacy of the pope gradually began to
take precedence.

While the subject of indulgences was still burning, Cardinal Cajetan had availed himself of his stay at Augsburg to compose a series
of scholarly treatises on the doctrine of indulgences. *® He also drew

up a scheme for a doctrinal decree of Leo X on this question. This
highly important papal decree, which definitely determined the traditional teaching of the Church, appeared on November 9, 1518. *°
Cajetan, who was an excellent commentator of St. Thomas Aquinas,
also perceived the importance of the doctrine of the primacy in view
of the progress of the Lutheran controversy. He began the composition of a scholarly work, On the Divine Institution of the Roman

Pontificate over the Universal Church, which appeared in 1521 and
was immediately reprinted at Cologne by Peter Quentell. *

John Eck, a theologian of Ingolstadt, shared Cajetan’s conviction

that the question of papal supremacy would become the real and decisive battleground for the future. The Catholic cause is indebted to

his versatile and powerful pen for the comprehensive Latin work, Of
the Primacy of Peter, Three Books against Ludder, which originally
appeared at Ingolstadt in 1520.*!

In defending the spiritual supremacy of the successors of St. Peter
in Rome, both writers, the Italian and the German, appealed most

ademphatically with the entire Catholic tradition to Christ’s wordsfaith
his
ed
profess
ly
solemn
had
latter
the
dressed to the Apostle after
in His divinity: “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it” (Matt. xvi,
when,
18). They likewise quoted the immortal words of the Saviour,care
of
l
pastora
the
to
sheep
after His resurrection, He confided His
sheep”
my
feed
lambs,
my
Peter on the shores of Lake Tiberias: “Feed

(John xxi, 15 sqq.). By means of this concept of the Church, founded
88 F. Lauchert, Die italienischen Gegner Luthers, 1918, p. 141.
89 Kalkoff, Luther und die Entscheidungsjabre, pp. 86—88.

40 Lauchert, op. cit., pp. 142—155.

41 Wiedemann, Dr. Job. Eck, 1865, p. §517.

112

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

by Christ as the visible spiritual kingdom of the faithful, they furthermore demonstrated that, subject to its invisible Head, namely, the
Son of God, there must be a visible head to govern this spiritual society, in order to bind its members in the necessary unity and to pre-

serve it from dissolution. They appealed to the history of the Church

from the time of its inception for illuminating proofs of the fact that
the successors of St. Peter in the see of Rome had always possessed the
supreme power

in

governing

the

Church,

though

a

progressive

development in the use of that power must be acknowledged. They

emphasized that all centuries, up to their own, were replete with most
glorious achievements on the part of the papacy, though there had
been a few unworthy popes. Guided by God, the papacy had conferred

upon mankind the golden gifts of Christian civilization and culture,
resisted the arrogance of mighty rulers, protected the rights of the

lowly, and raised the heart of humanity to celestial things. Finally,
they maintained, it was a crime against the will of Christ, against the
foundation of the divine temple of the Church, against the duty of

gratitude towards the society of the faithful which had been
nurtured by the papacy, to attack the rights of the occupant
of the Holy
See.

John Eck, the most successful and most celebrated defend

papacy against Luther in Germany, was born

er of the

in the town of Eck in

Swabia. His real name was John Mayr. In 1 s10 he became
a professor
at the University of Ingolstadt and, at the same time,
canon of the
cathedral of Eichstitt. Thoroughly conversant with
humanism, this
learned theologian corresponded with a large numbe
r of the most
prominent men of the age. He was known
for his cleverness in

scientific discussions, was well-read and endow

ed with a stupendous

memory. These gifts were supplement
ed by extraordinary physi-

cal powers; he was a gigantic man who, when

engaged in disputation,

was wont to dominate the situation
with his stentorian voice,
In May, 1518, Karlstadt had publi
shed a series of theses against

Eck’s “Obelisci” at Wittenberg. Eck not
only replied with a set of
other theses, but challenged him to a publi
c disputation, to be conducted at one of the great university cities,
Rome, Paris, or Cologne.

Leipsic was finally selected, and Eck
endeavored to obtain the consent of Duke George, who was reput
ed to be a great patron of schol-

arly pursuits. Prior to the meeting,
however, Eck published twelve
theses, which were expressly, thou
gh somewhat covertly, directed

THE LEIPSIC DISPUTATION OF 1519

113

against the person of Luther and his doctrines. The final thesis dealt
with the Roman primacy. Luther, in the “Resolutions” which he had
appended to his theses on indulgences, had asserted (though without
denying the rights of the existing primacy) that he knew of no primacy of Rome over the universal Church, at least not over the Oriental Church, before the time of Gregory the Great, i. e., about the

year 600. Eck in his final thesis against Luther says: “We deny that
the Roman Church had no precedence over the other churches before
the age of Sylvester (died 335), and acknowledge him who occupies
the see of St. Peter as the successor of Peter and the universal vicegerent of Christ.” Luther indignantly declared that he was the one
who had been challenged to the projected disputation. In this he was
not entirely wrong. Nevertheless he made up his mind to participate

in the Leipsic discussion. In the beginning of February, 1519, he
published twelve antitheses against Eck, and soon after, boldly added

a thirteenth against the authority of the pope. Although his most intimate friends had hitherto cautioned him not to revolt against Rome,

ely
“the thirteenth thesis appears entirely too audacious, nay, absolutdeuntenable, even to more recent Protestant writers.” 42 This thesis
clared that his opponents could base their proofs for the primacy only
on the “frosty decretals of the last four centuries.”
his
Luther expected to take part in the disputation and to surpriseinto
delved
he
ingly,
Accord
nts.
argume
cal
opponents with histori
was
history to discover proofs for the negation, which, as far as he
that
of
letters
his
In
.
proofs
ut
witho
even
concerned, was irrefragable

the papacy, against which
period he repeatedly spoke of the hydra ofprevio
us activities, he said,
His
.
it was his duty to launch an attack
rison. “The Lord
compa
by
s-play
now appeared to him as mere child’
pseudo-mystical
this
In
y.”
lingl
pulls me, and I follow Him not unwil
ned—he arrived
imagi
he
as
frame of mind—Iled by the hand of God,

pope was Antihistorically and Scripturally at the discovery that thesecon
d chapter of

christ. 48 He finds that the mysterious words inSt.theJohn (ii, 18) on the
Thessalonians, and those in the first Epistle toof a particular person, as
of Antichrist, are not applicable
advent
institution, whose antitradition would have it, but to the papacy as an
Christian nature, now that the end of the world was nigh, must be
exposed by him, the witness choésen of God.

Berlin, 1903, Vol. I,
42 K5stlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, sth ed.,
$q9.
48 Cf, Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1lI, pp. 142

p. 235.

I14

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

This idea, which was to control his later life, soon struck deep roots

in him.

On December 11, 1518, he announced his “presentiment” to Wenceslaus Link. In a letter of March 13, 1519, addressed to his friend and
helper at the Electoral court, Spalatin, he speaks more clearly:
“In
connexion with my disputation, I am reviewing the decretals
of the
popes, and—I whisper it into your ear—am uncertain whether
the
pope is himself Antichrist, or an apostle of Antichrist, so
awfully is
Christ, i. e., the truth, crucified in the decretals.” He penned
these
lines only two months after he had addressed his fawnin
g letter of
submission to Pope Leo. Soon the mask drops from his
face entirely.
Without awaiting the disputation, he publishes his
conclusions in a

set of Latin “Resolutions” on the aforementioned

thirteenth thesis, in
which he complains that no one wishes to acknow
ledge that Antichrist “sitteth in the temple of God at Rome.
” (2 Thess. i, 4).
The day of the disputation was approaching, and as
yet Luther had
not been invited. Duke George of Saxony
was still opposed to his
taking part in it. Some of the bishops attempted
to prevent the dis-

putation, because, no matter what its outco
me might be, in their opinjon it would only serve to spread the innova
tions, and because the final
decision lay solely with the supreme ecclesi
astical tribunal. Their
efforts, however, were futile.
Impelled by an intense desire to fight,
Luther accompanied his

friend Karlstadt to Leipsic, where, at the

last moment, he was per-

these two men, mainly on free will, lasted

up to July 2, inclusively.

mitted to participate in the disputation.
He afterwards said that he
entered the disputation under the aegis
of Karlstadt. The oratorical
contest began June 27, in the great aula
of the Pleissenburg, in the
presence of the duke and his court,
the professors of the university,
and many other scholars who had come
from far and near,
Karlstadt had first to dispute with Eck.
The disputation between

Karlstadt showed himself inferior to

Eck in versatility and knowl-

edge. He was small of stature and his
voice was hoarse; he was often
timid. The audience became bored
because his defective memory
compelled him to consult books to
prove his assertions. The weather
was hot and quite a2 number of profe
ssors fell asleep.

The audience was aroused when, on
July 4, Luther appeared at the
lecturer’s desk with a bouquet in his
hand, which he, from time to
time, held to his nose, after the manner
of one who pretends superior-

THE LEIPSIC DISPUTATION OF 1519

11§

ity. His finger was adorned with a shining silver ring. For the rest he
wore his monastic habit. Mosellanus (Peter Schade of Bruttig), the
humanist, who was present, says that, seeing his medium-sized slender
frame, one was almost able to count Luther’s bones, a condition
resulting from worry, study, and labor. He also reports that Luther
spoke in a high, clear voice. Tradition has it that he distinguished
himself by an extraordinary adroitness in the use of Scriptural texts.

He did not measure up to the clarity and demonstrative force of
Eck, who, moreover, by his ready wit and acuteness in detecting
contradictions, defects and sudden transitions, showed up many a

weak point in Luther’s argument. This is proved by the report of
the proceedings drawn up by the notaries who were present.

The two disputants were supposed to discuss, in turn, the papacy,

indulgences, Purgatory, and other controversial topics. However, the
debate on the papacy consumed almost the entire time. Shrewdly
appraising the situation, Eck, on July s, cited the ecumenical Council
of Constance, which had condemned Hus as 2 heretic for denying
the primacy. He did this in order to compel Luther to make a definite

profession of faith, Luther at first replied that he was certain that

among the condemned propositions of Hus there were many which
were quite Christian and evangelical, and which the universal Church
could not condemn. From this Eck at once drew the conclusion
that he (Luther) did not even recognize the ecumenical councils.
His opponent became startled and sought to retrace his steps, say-

ing that perhaps those decrees of the Council of Constance were not
genuine; for the rest, he contended, the word of God alone is in-

fallible. Then he modified this latter statement by saying that while
conciliar resolutions in matters of faith are binding, they may some-

times be erroneous. Eck pinned him to his assertion that the Council
of Constance may have erred in the question of the primacy, and
that
inexorably confronted him with all the inferences implied in who
,
George
Duke
bluff
y,
temerit
’s
assertion. Indignant at Luther
was loyal to the Church, exclaimed in a voice loud enough to be heard
throughout the great hall: “A plague on it!”

On July 14, Purgatory, indulgences, and penance formed theg
nothin
subject of disputation between Eck and Karlstadt, but
position
the
d
define
y
clearl
further was accomplished except that Eck

ity of the Church.
of the Church, whilst Karlstadt denied the author(16),
it was agreed
15
At the conclusion of the disputation, on July

116

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

to submit the minutes to the universities of Erfurt and Paris, which,
however, also proved ineffective.
Luther was uneasy at the result of the controversy. After he had

returned home, he wrote to Spalatin that the Leipsic disputation

had commenced badly and ended badly, and that Eck and the men
of Leipsic were to blame, because they did not seek the truth, but
their own glory. He indemnified himself before the public by publish-

ing, towards the end of August, elucidations on the theses which
had been discussed at Leipsic. In these he proclaimed, even more
decisively than before his adhesion to his own assertions, and distorted
the position of his opponents.
Eck, on the other hand, triumphed, especially for the reason that
he had succeeded in exposing Luther as a heretic who wished to
destroy the authority of the councils and of the Church. He gained
the support of other Catholic writers, who espoused his cause and
that of the papacy which had been disparaged. Among those who

supported him was the priest Jerome Emser, formerly private

secretary to Duke George, a learned humanist and theologian,
who at-

tacked Luther in a number of polemical writings, which elicited
violent replies.

The number of Luther’s friends and followers also increase
d in

consequence of the growing intensity of the battle.
It was of less

importance that the Hussite opponents of the Council of Constan

ce
in Bohemia complimented him on his attitude at Leipsic
and his
subsequent writings. The Utraquists endeavored to form
an alliance
with him, but their efforts did not result in any intimate
, lasting
union. As a result of the terrible Hussite campai
gns waged on German soil, the Hussite faction had too bad a name
in that country
to make it prudent for Luther to form an intimat
e alliance with
them at this juncture, The sympathy of the neo-German
humanists,
which had been aroused by the Leipsic disputation, was
of far greater
importance and promise for his cause. Crotus
Rubeanus, a leader
of this group, wrote Luther from Italy, on Octobe
r 16, 1519, reminding him of their former association and
adding that he had
extolled him at Rome as the father of his countr
y, who was worthy
of a golden statue because he was the first to
rise up in behalf of

the emancipation of God’s people from false
opinions; for this

purpose he had been called by divine provid
ence like another Paul

when a flash of lightning had prostrated him near

Erfurt and driven

iy

MELANCHTHON

him into a monastery, a cause of “mourning to us, your companions.” **

At this time he was also befriended by the Erfurt humanist and
jurist, Justus Jonas, subsequently his ally, who applied himself avidly
to the study of the new theology.

The most influential accession to the cause of Luther, however, was
the support of Melanchthon, who accompanied him to Leipsic and
whose enthusiasm for the light of Wittenberg was unbounded.

Philip Melanchthon (Schwarzerd), though but twenty-one years

of age, had achieved distinction as a philologist; at the recommendation of Reuchlin he had left Tiibingen in the summer of 1518 and
went to the University of Wittenberg to teach Greek and to carry
out his plan of issuing an edition of Aristotle in the original. His

acquaintance with Luther and the latter’s active influence attracted
the highly gifted young layman to theology, particularly in its
Lutheran form. Luther promptly detected the value which the
scholarly attainments and the amiability of the “weak little man”

would have for his cause. With his dominating nature he completely
captivated the pliant and susceptible youth. Even later, when Melanchthon had opposed the doctrinal rigor and harsh conduct of
Luther, the pensive bookworm was unable to escape the overwhelm-

ing influence of his master. In his antipathy toward Scholastics and
theology
“sophists,” he at once launched upon the sea of Lutheran theses
for
his
with such impetuosity that he partly outdid Luther inhim September
the theological baccalaureate which was conferred on
ranism, however,
9, 1519. His later achievements in behalf of Luthehis
erudition and
that
consisted particularly in two things: first, r’s
formal training enabled him to cast Luthe ideas into a certain

he possessed a
systematic and academical form, and, second, thatneces
sary to incertain skill, prudence, and flexibility which were
empire and with the
sure success in the public negotiations withh the
Luther himself lacked.*®
opponents of the new theology, gifts whicwith
Luther, Melanchthon
ce
intan
acqua
In the first years of his
ully we must guard this
wrote to Spalatin: “You know how caref
treasure. . . . The earth
a
great
so
earthen vessel which contains
He styles Luther *“our
46
him.”
holds nothing more divine than
44 K sstlin-Kawerau, Martin Luther, Vol. 1, p. 251.

45 Briefwechsel, 11, pp. 204 sqq.

46 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, p. 269; Kostlin-Kawerau, op. cit., I,

442.

118

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

Elias.” *" Luther appeared to him as one “destined by God” for his

work, “driven by the spirit of God.” “Leave him to the working
of his own spirit and resist not the will of God.” ¢ Luther requited

him with exuberant eulogies. He declared that “almost everything”

about this youthful scholar was “superhuman.” “He excels me in
scholarship by his learning and the integrity of his life.” *° Some of the propositions which the theological “learning” of the philologian

was capable of inspiring, are set forth in the Loci Communes Rerum
Theologicarum, published by Melanchthon in 1521, which will be
discussed in the sequel.
In connection with the polemical activity which Luther unfolded
in the year of the Leipsic disputation, we must here advert
to his
pamphlet against Eck concerning the affair of the Francisc
ans of
Juterbog. The latter had courageously preached against
Luther’s
doctrines. Eck had seconded their efforts by means
of printed theses.
Luther attacked the friars and Eck, their counselor, in
a rude pamphlet
in which he styled them “vipers and a brood of vipers,
” and also for
the first time inveighed against confession, which,
he alleged, was

not a divine institution,?® but introduced

by a pope.
Jerome Dungersheim, professor of theolo
gy at Leipsic, who by
means of irenic and learned letters endeavored
to persuade Luther to

abandon his course, received from him a privat
e reply in which he
said: “We desire to have the Scriptures
as our judge, whereas you

desire to judge the Scriptures.” He warne
d him not to abuse his

patience, since “‘countless wolves were
tugging” at him already.5!

He also reproved the Roman chamberlai
n Miltitz, when the latter

again appeared with conciliatory sugges
tions and endeavored to in-

duce him to go with him to Treves to

let the Elector, Richard von
y. It was all the easier for him

Greiffenklau, arbitrate the controvers

to reject this proposal, since Milti
tz had no papal approbation for

his plan, and since, moreover, the Elect

or of Saxony objected to the
the dangers that beset it. For the
benefit of his high protector, Luther,
in a letter written in December
to Spalatin, said: “I should wish
to fall into their hands, so that

journey to Treves on account of

47 Grisar, op. cit., 111, P. 322.
48 Grisar, op. cit., III, 263; cfr.
322.
49 “Eruditione et integritate vitae.
” Op. cit., I, 321,
80 Késtlin-Kawerau, Martin
Luther, Vol. 1, pp. 254, 257.
810p. cit., 1, p. 248,

DEVOTIONAL WRITINGS

119

they could appease their fury, did I not fear for the Word and the
as yet small army of God.” °?

The Elector Frederick was very susceptible to the pious suggestions

of Luther, whom, however, for prudential reasons, he did not wish

to see. At his instigation, he diligently read the Bible. As the prince was

ill since the end of August, Luther composed a comprehensive and
consolatory treatise for him. It was written during the stress of his
polemical writings, many of which he prepared simultaneously

for the press. The work, an irenical and sententious treatise for all

sufferers in general, appeared in Latin and in German at the beginning of 1520, and bore the title: “Tessaradekas” (the number fourteen). Its fourteen motives for patience were intended to replace

the invocation of the Fourteen Holy Helpers. In this work the
productivity of his pen is evidenced in a marvellous manner; not-

withstanding the constant agitation in which he was steeped, this

work shows that he was endowed with ability to write in a tone of
sincere piety.

In addition to his polemical writings Luther composed many re-

ligious works of a practical nature. His polemical productions however, outnumbered the others. He denounced the distinguished Dominican theologian Hoogstraten, of Cologne, who had appealed
against him to the pope, as “‘an illogical ass and 2 bloodthirsty enemy
of the truth.” In editing his lectures on the Epistle to the Galatians,

of
he sharpened his statements about the new Gospel by the use
savorons
reflexi
with
side
by
pointed denunciations, which stand side
ing of mysticism. He concluded this commentary with a violent tirade,
in the style of the Old Testament prophets, concerning the decadence
of the Church in his day. In the interval between his bitter invectivesr
smalle
against Emser at Dresden and other similar publications of aretati
on
interp
scope, appeared the printed beginnings of his larger

of the psalms (Operationes in Psalmos) and his Latin postil, for
Father the
Advent. Incidentally he composed tracts on the Ourother
topics.
Passion of Christ, preparation for death, usury, and
he

lf as extensively as
Prior to Luther no one had ever availed himsests
of a cause. Scarcely
did of the infant art of printing in the interean incess
ant activity in
anyone in succeeding ages attained to such
the use of the press as Luther.
In addition there were many publications by others, either in
52 Briefwechsel, 11, p. 275.

120

LUTHER’S DEVELOPMENT FROM 1517 TO 1519

his defense or in opposition to him. Many of his sermons were copied
and printed either with or without his knowledge. Thus, two sermons
which had been carefully copied appeared simultaneously in print,
—one “On the Twofold Righteousness,” the other, a companion
piece, “On the State of Matrimony,” in a form which aroused lively
objections on account of the unheard-of frankness with which
that subject was treated. It is not possible to ascertain the extent to

which the printed text departed from Luther’s sermon. In consequence of complaints that were made against it, he issued a revised
edition of it, in the introduction to which he says that there is “a
great difference between giving expression to something viva voce
and in dead letters.” In a letter to Lang at Erfurt he declined responsibility for the first edition of his homily on matrimony, saying that
it was produced without his knowledge and caused him to feel disgraced. In the revised edition he deals arbitrarily with the doctrine
and practice of the Church and expresses doubts about the validity
of clandestine marriages, which at that time were universally regarded as valid. The sermon in its revised edition was extensively
circulated.
In the beginning of October, 1519, Luther reported to Staupitz
that he was satisfied with his success. Due to representations made to
Staupitz because of his favoring of Luther, he assumed a more reserved attitude towards him. Archbishop Lang of Salzburg sought
to attract Staupitz to his episcopal city. In the above quoted letter

Luther complains: “You turn your back to me too much. As your
favorite child I am keenly hurt at this. I pray you, praise God also
in me, the sinner. I detest this very wicked life, I have a great fear
of death, I am devoid of faith, though richly endowed with other
gifts. However, I desire to serve Christ alone with my talents; He
knows it.” 53
Eck was a man of quite different character. Luther and Karlstadt
having sent their versions of the Leipsic disputation to the Elector
Frederick of Saxony, the latter forwarded them to Eck, who in
a lengthy publication frankly and honestly corrected the reports of
his opponents, showing “how they economized the truth in diverse
ways.”

Eck had to suffer much on account of the courageous stand he
had taken. Among those who inclined to Luther’s side Oecolampadius,
83 1bid., p. 184; October 3, 1519,

JOHN ECK

121

who subsequently became famous, wrote a sharp satire against him.
More bitter still was the contumely heaped on him in an anonymous
lampoon which bore the title: “The Planed Eck” (Eccius dedolatus),
supposed to have been written by Willibald Pirkheimer. As late as

1540, Eck, who had been persecuted throughout his life, wrote that his
traducers had depicted him in many forms, among others as a man who
had been “planed” and roasted.’* It was not as though Eck had not in
his private life furnished occasions for reproach; but in his defense
of the Church he permitted nothing to daunt him. Soon after the
disputation at Leipsic he ascended the pulpit of the magnificent
Gothic Church of Our Lady in Munich, the residential city of the
dukes of Bavaria, and raised his powerful voice against the Witten-

berg doctrines—the first to point out to Bavaria the ways of defending the faith to which it subsequently adhered. He gradually completed his work on the primacy of the pope, which had not yet

appeared in print at that time. The primacy of the pope and the
Roman Church in his opinion occupied the forefront in the controversy—so much so that he desired nothing more ardently than a

final decision by the Apostolic See. He rejoiced very much, there-

fore, when a brief of Leo X summoned him to Rome to report on
conditions in Germany. In the midst of winter, on January 18,

1520, he proceeded by way of Salzburg to the Eternal City, bringing with him Luther’s German works, translated into Latin. On April
1 he presented to the Pope the manuscript of his own work on the
primacy.®®
54 Th. Wiedemann, Jobann Eck, p. 141.
83 Ibid., p. 150.

- CHarTER VI

SIGNS OF THE COMING TEMPEST IN STATE AND
CHURCH

LUTHER’S OPINIONS OF THE AGE
I.

CURRENTS

OF

THE

NEW

AGE

Powerful movements which, proclaiming an intellectual revolution and connected more or less intimately with the revival of the
.

study of classical antiquity, pervaded the Western world since the
fifteenth century, and presaged a new period in the history of mankind.

This agitation was bound to react on young Luther.
The newly invented art of printing had at one stroke created a
world-wide community of intellectual accomplishments and literary

ideas, such as the Middle Ages had never dreamt of. By the exchange
of the most diverse and far-reaching discoveries the nations came
into closer proximity with one another. The spirit of secular enter-

prise awakened as from a long sleep at the astounding discovery of
new countries overseas with unsuspected treasures.

As a result of the increased facility of intellectual intercourse
and of the development of scientific methods, criticism began to
function with an efficiency greater than ever before in all departments of knowledge. Yielding to an ancient urge, the larger com-

monwealths made themselves increasingly independent of their
former tutelage by the Church. They strove after liberty and the
removal of that clerical influence whence they had largely derived
their durability and internal prosperity in the past. And in proportion as they struggled for autonomy, the opulent cities, the knightly

demesnes and principalities, particularly in Germany, tried to throw
off the fetters which hitherto had oppressed them, and to increase
their power. In brief, we find everywhere a violent break with former
restrictions, a determined advance of subjectivism at the expense of

solidarity and the traditional order of the Middle Ages, but especially
at the expense of the supremacy of the spiritual power of the Church,
122

