CHAPTER XIV

LUTHER ON THE SIDE OF THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE
—HIS TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

I. LUTHER’S CHANGE OF OPINION RELATIVE TO ARMED RESISTANCE

After the diet of Augsburg, a striking change took place in Luther’s attitude toward the question of armed resistance to the Em-

peror. The stringent measures of the “Reichskammergericht” announced in the “Abschied” of the diet against the secularization of
Catholic church property and the rigorous steps which were generally adopted against the new religion, produced a definite attitude on

~ the part of Protestants. The jurists of Electoral Saxony expressed
themselves to Chancellor Briick increasingly in favor of preparedness
and forceful resistance to the imperial mandates. Philip of Hesse, who
had formed ambitious projects against the Emperor, was prepared to
open hostilities at the first favorable opportunity and counted on the
support of all those who shared his ideas.

Luther personally would have preferred a policy of watchful
of
waiting without the use of violence. He held that the execution
imas
trated
demons
be
the resolutions adopted at Augsburg should
ul way.
possible by permitting the innovations to progress in a peacefwere
and

as they
He would have been pleased if things had been left
the new gospel.
of
time thus gained for the further propagation attit
ude—a change
However, circumstances forced him to change his of that
armed rewhich led to self-contradiction and open sanction
sistance which he had previously condemned.

permissible to meet
His former teaching had been that it was notror;
that, according
violence with violence, especially against thebeEmpe
red with Christian
to the gospel, unjust persecution was to suffe
.
resignation and in the expectation of final assistance from above

determined him to issue such
Despite his blustering, various reasonsplace
influenced by the
declarations repeatedly. In the first whic, hhehewas
oped in the
after-effects of the mystical idealismthe kingdomhadofdevel
knew only
God
h
monastery, and according to whicand
Christrue
y
ever
on;
issi
subm
lity,
a yielding disposition, humibe
dethe
but
d,”
race
disg
and
tian must allow himself to “oppressed
403

404

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

fense of rights was the business of the secular authorities. In addition,

he had firmly persuaded himself that God would and must prosper his

cause. Luther was convinced that he was right and, consequen
tly,
enjoyed the protection of Heaven, while, on the other hand
he

“knew” that “the Emperor is not and cannot be sure of his cause.”
Secondly, he was influenced by the consideration that, if military
force were to be invoked in support of his gospel, the prospect
s of
success on the part of the princes who favored him were unfavora
ble
and that the frightful misfortune of war had better be averted
for
humanitarian reasons. “May God preserve us from such a horror!
”2
He exclaims, since, as he puts it, a breach and disturba
nce of the
public peace would be “a stain on our doctrine.” ® His religiou
s innovations would more readily recommend themselves to

the princes

if they made their way as peaceably as possible, without any
ance and conflict.

disturb-

Hence his assertion, repeated particularly during the first
years
after his apostasy, that the Word alone must accompl
ish all
things, and his appeal to “the breath of Christ,” which,
according to
the Bible, is to destroy Antichrist. Even as late as 1530,
Elector John
of Saxony was in complete accord with Luther’s idea
that armed re-

sistance to the Emperor was unlawful.4

Nevertheless, it is well known that, from the beginni
ng, Luther
allowed himself again and again to clamor for war.
It was 2 demand
born of his agitated temperament and his ardent
zeal for his gospel.
Thus, in 1522, he declared that “every power must
yield to the Gospel.” * “Not only the spiritual, but also the secular power,
must yield
to the Gospel whether cheerfully or otherwise.” “Not
a hair’s breadth
will I yield to the opponents”; and: “If war will
ensue, let there be
war”

(1530). “If Germany will perish, if it will
go to rack and

ruin, how can I help it? I cannot save

conceded to the Elector Frederick the

it.” In 1523 he had already
right to bear arms in defense

of the new doctrine, provided he did this

spirit and faith,” not as a Christian

“at the call of a singular

prince engaged in his own affairs,

but asa stranger who comes to the rescue
. In an opinion which he rendered for the successor of Frederick, in
1529, he said: “There must be
1 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 111, pp. 47 5q.
B 1bid., p. 49.

31bid., p. 43.
4 Kostlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol.
5 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, p. 76.

II, p. 249.

CHANGE OF OPINION RELATIVE TO ARMED RESISTANCE

4o5

no resistance unless actual violence is done or dire necessity compels.” ®

These utterances laid the foundation for the change of mind which

came over him in 1§31.

He was still wavering when, just prior to the assembly of the diet of

Augsburg, he explained to his Elector in a rather lengthy memoran-

dum that military resistance “can in no wise be reconciled with Scripture.” “In the confusion and tumult which would ensue,” he says,
“everyone would want to be emperor, and what horrible bloodshed and
misery would that not cause!” *“A Christian ought to be ready to suffer
violence and injustice, more particularly from his own ruler.” It were
‘preferable to sacrifice life and limb, i.c., endure martyrdom.” It seems

that he was at that time very much frightened at the thought of the
“disgrace” which would attach to his doctrine if it stirred up a religious

war. This memorandum was formulated after Luther had conferred
with his three advisers, Jonas, Bugenhagen, and Melanchthon. It was,

however, kept secret, perhaps in order to avoid any friction with the

electoral jurists, who were rather inclined to war. An abstract was sent
only to Spengler at Nuremberg, which city was likewise disposed to disapprove of resistance.

This memorandum caused the adherents of the new religion great

embarrassment later on, after Luther had changed his mind and theProtestant Estates, appealing to his authority had entered the Schmal
kaldic War. Cochlaeus obtained its text, and published it with glosses
directed against its vacillating author. The courageous abbot,hePaul
Bachmann of Altenzelle, appended a reply to Luther, in whichPope,says
as
that Luther had ever raved against the Emperor and the

andum,
though they were worse than the Turks; but in this memor
round and
“being apprehensive of resistance, the 'old serpent turnsrevere
nce for
and
ce,
patien
ty,
humili
false
a
faces its tail, simulating
e vioendur
to
ready
be
must
ian
Christ
A
the authorities, and says:
who
rs,
advise
’s
Luther
,
corner
a
into
n
lence from his ruler.” ® Drive
imto
tried
e
demis
his
after
y
shortl
,
had approved the memorandum
hagen
Bugen
,
ntally
incide
so
did
n
pugn its authenticity. Melanchtho
of set purpose, for which he was justly reproved in public by Ratzeberger, a well-informed friend of Luther.®
8 The cited passages ibid., pp. 45—50.

‘

7 Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, pp. 138 sq. (Briefweclrsel. VII, p. 239); Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1,

p.

§2.

8 Grisar, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 63.

9 1bid., p. 74

406

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

The rapidity with which Luther changed his mind after formulating the above-mentioned memorandum was chiefly owing to the

decision of the diet of Augsburg which was so unfavorable to him.
His inclination to offer resistance manifests itself at once in his

“Warning” to his dear Germans, which he composed shortly after

the close of the diet and which has been discussed above, as well as
in the tract which he penned against “the assassin of Dresden.”

At the end of October, 1530, he was obliged to repair to Torgau
with Melanchthon and Jonas for a conference concerning the ques-

tion of resistance. There he met the legal advisers of his territorial
lord and, perhaps, those of other princes. He was unable to resist
their influence. At first he refused to declare himself, claiming that
the question did not concern him, since it was his sole duty
as a
theologian to teach Christ. The laws of -the Empire ought
to be
obeyed; what these were, he neither knew nor cared to know.
But

the jurists insisted that he express an opinion on a lengthy docu-

ment which they had drawn up in justification of war.

After enumerating alleged juridical and theological reasons, this
document
asserted that the “proceedings and acts” of the Empero
r “were in
contravention of law”; that, so far as the decision
of this matter is

concerned, he was “but a private individual.” Luther
did not contradict them, but placed the responsibility upon the
jurists, leaving

them to proceed as they pleased. Conjointly with Melanc
hthon and
Jonas he declared that, up to now, he and the theologi
ans, precisely
as theologians, had taught that it was “not right to offer
outright
resistance to the authorities,” but they did not know
that, as the
jurists pointed out, the authorities themselves conferr
ed the right of
armed resistance in cases such as that under
consideration. Hence,
they could “not quote the Bible against such resista
nce, when necessary for defense, even if it were against the
Emperor in person.”
Taking these things into consideration, all
three declared that the
warlike preparations were justified.!?
In writing about this affair to Link, Luther
said: “In no wise
have we counseled the use of force. But if the
Emperor by virtue of

his laws concedes the right of resistance
in such a case, then let
him bear the consequences.” In that event,
he says, the princes,

qua princes, and in this capacity
only, may offer resistance. “To
10 15id.

CHANGE OF OPINION RELATIVE TO ARMED RESISTANCE

407

a Christian, nothing [of that sort] is lawful, for he is dead to the
world.” 11
These vexatious and threadbare explanations did not, however,
satisfy Link and his followers at Nuremberg, who continued to
side with Spengler in his stand against resistance. Neither would the
people of the margravate of Brandenburg listen to this over-refined
casuistry, but persisted in their refusal to offer resistance. Luther

relied all the more on his pretext, that this question should be decided by the politicians and jurists; that he, as a theologian, was
obliged to refrain from offering advice; and said he abstained from
offering counsel for reasons of a more lofty piety; and that he would
have the entire matter rest not on “the power of man,” but on that
of God; for, then only “it would turn out well, even if it be a
downright error and sin.” 12 Despite these extenuating phrases, the
jurists, as was to be expected, made use of his declaration given at
Torgau as a simple and complete acquiescence in their endeavor to
bring about the formation of the military League of Schmalkalden.
Spengler, who had a copy of Luther’s opinion of March, 1530, in
which he strictly declined to approve of resistance, wrote from

Nuremberg that he was amazed “that Doctor Martin should so
contradict himself.” 13 Besides the pressure of the jurists, the fol-

lowing circumstances may have contributed to change Luther’s attitude: First, the prospect of successful resistance as a result of the
increased opposition to Rome, especially in consequence of the defection of England initiated at that time, and the prospective
Protestantization of Wiirttemberg; secondly, the Emperor’s preoccupation with the hostile king of France; and, finally, the weakness and
indccision of some of the Catholic estates which manifested itself at
the diet of Augsburg.

As a matter of fact, Luther waxed ever more positive in his demand

for armed resistance after 1531.

“We may not deviate a hair’s breadth on the plea of disturbing the
public peace,” he wrote. “We must trust in God, who has thus far
protected His Church during the most terrible wars.” '* In 1536,
11 Briefwechsel, VIIL, p. 344; January x5, x531; Grisar, Luther, Vol. 11, p. 6o.
12 Letter to a citizen of Nuremberg, March 18, 1531; Erl. ed, Vol. LIV, p. 221
(Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 378); Grisar, op. cit., 111, p. 62.
18 See Enders in Briefwechsel, VIII, p. 298; Grisar, op. cit., p. §59.
14 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 78 sq.

408

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

subscribing to a document which emphasized the duty to offer
armed resistance for the protection of the Gospel, he said: “I, Martin
Luther, will do my best by prayer and, if needs be, with the fist.” 1°
In his excitability and tempestuous nature he even demanded the
infliction of the death penalty upon the pope and his rabble, i. e.,
his defenders. In 1540, he gave notice that there was no other choice
“but to take up arms in common against all the monks and shavelings;
I too shall join in, for it is right to slay the miscreants like mad
dogs.” 16 In this same year he also said: “We shall not prevail against
the Turks unless we slay them in time, together with the priests, and

even hurl them to death.” 17 Neither in this nor in similar passages
is there any question of defense against force, but rather advocacy
of bloody aggression. Yet, even if these ravings are outburst of impetuous anger, and not the expressions of calm deliberation, they

indicate a deplorable state of mind and served upon occasion to
justify the bloody crimes which resulted from the conflict between
the advancing party of religious reform and the defenders of the
old order.
2.

THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE AFTER

I§3I

The military League of Schmalkalden was initiated as early as
February 27, 1531, by John of Saxony and Duke Ernest of Braunschweig at the instigation of the jurists. It was completed at Schmalkalden on March 29, when the remaining members affixed their seal
to the document. Besides the rulers of electoral Saxony and Braunschweig-Liineburg, there were affiliated with it Landgrave Philip
of Hesse, Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt, Counts Gebhard and Albrecht
of Mansfeld, and the cities of Strasburg, Ulm, Constance, Reutlingen,
Memmingen, Lindau, Biberach, Isny, Liibeck, Magdeburg, and
Bremen. Others joined the league later. The members bound themselves by an oath to come to the relief of any member attacked on
account of the Gospeél or on any other pretext.!8
Thus a wedge was driven into the unity of the German nation at
15 1bid., p. 433.
18 Op cit.,, Vol. VI, p. 247.

17 Op. cit.,, Vol. IIl, p. 69. Cfr. Grisar and Heege, Luthers Kampfbilder, n. 4 (Lutherstudien), pp. 138 sq., where more pertinent passages as well as Luther’s cartoon: “The Pope
and the Cardinals on the Gallows,” may be found (p. 32); cfr. also ibid., n. 31.
18 Grisar, Luther, Vol. I, p. 64.

THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE AFTER 1531

409

the expense of its internal strength and external development.
The Protestants were now a united political power. What Landgrave Philip and Elector John had commenced when they formed
their military alliance at Gotha, in 1526, was now completed. The

defense of the interests of the religious innovation passed from Luther
and his theologians to the secular authorities; and the latter knew well

how to pursue their selfish interests with advantage.

Luther may have been glad to remain somewhat in the background when the League was formed. The jurists and rulers were
promoting his cause. If the League should prove disastrous for Germany—which actually happened—his gospel would be less exposed

to criticism. Nevertheless, he had to reckon with the decline of his
popularity due to the existence of the League. In no small measure he
forfeited the direction of his work because of the action of the political

rulers.

Schmalkalden was a small city in Hesse, situated south of Eisenach
in the administrative area of Prussia. Inclosed in a pleasant valley,
where the Stille flows into the Schmalkalde (a tributary of the
Werra), the town presents a peaceful scene, in strong contrast with
the recollections of the religious struggles in which it played a rédle.
Verdant hills surround the city, the Rotberg and the Giefelsberg to
the north, the Wolfsberg and the Grasberg to the south. To the east
rises a hill, on which was enthroned the ancient castle of Walrab,

which is now reconstructed into the stately Wilhelmsschloss. The city
was encircled by a wall which has almost completely disappeared.
Within its bosom the parochial church of St. George raised aloft its
two spires; they are of a late Gothic design, and are still well preserved. The venerable church testifies to the pious and vigorous
Catholic life that prevailed before the Protestant Reformation. The

sessions of the Schmalkaldic League were held in the old-fashioned
town-hall, which is still partially preserved. Luther resided in a Patrician house at the foot of the castle-hill, which still exists. Here he
participated in the convention of the estates and theologians in 1537.
The residence of Melanchthon, known as “Rosenapotheke,” impresses

the eye of present-day visitors with its antique style of architecture.
A Zwinglian element had entered this city, dominated by Lutheranism at the time the widowed sister of Philip of Hesse, Elizabeth von

ted
Sachsen-Rochlitz, took up her abode in it. Her name is associa
Swiss
ed
with the change of the city to the religion of the so-call

410

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

reformers. In the parish church, which was at one time richly decorated

with statues, the empty pedestals bear mute evidence to the work of

destruction wrought by the Zwinglian vandals. After these iconoclasts had vented their fury on the altars, statues, reliquaries and
other works of sacred art, a train of wagons bearing religious objects wended its way up the hill behind the Wilhelmsschloss, where
the fanatical mob consigned them to the flames.
3. THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

(1§32)

AND

SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

While the Protestant party in Germany prudently set about to
circumvent the consequences of the diet of Augsburg by procuring

a temporary religious peace through intimidation, an open religious
war broke out in Switzerland, in consequence of the conditions
obtaining in that country. By the harsh methods under which the
new religion made its appearance under Zwingli’s leadership in
Zurich, that city had gotten into a war with the five Catholic
cantons of the Swiss Confederacy.

In the battle of Kappel, which was won by the Catholics on the
eleventh of October, 1531, Zwingli was wounded and killed. This
accident removed an inexorable enemy of Luther, and bettered the
prospects of a more intimate union of the German Zwinglians with

Lutheranism. Luther candidly expressed his satisfaction with the
judgment which God had visited upon Zwingli for denying the Eucharist, just as He had once singled out Miinzer for punishment. “I
have been a prophet when I said that God would not tolerate the
violent blasphemies of which his party was full.” Thus he wrote to
Link in Nuremberg.!® Without displaying the least compassion, he
consigned Zwingli to hell. Not long after Zwingli’s death, on November 24, Oecolampadius died at Basle, deeply humiliated. Both men,
said Luther, were to be proclaimed “damned,” even though this led to

“violence being offered them,” because this was the best way to

make people shrink from their false doctrines.2® H. Barge, a Protestant

author, justly says in his life of Karlstadt that Luther “particularly
availed himself in his systematic, most experienced and malicious
manner, of the forceful language he had at his command, in order
19 On January 3, 1532; Briefwechsel, IX, p. 139.
20 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1V, p. 87. Tischreden, Weim. ed., Vol. I, No. 1045; II, No. 2845.

THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

411

to decry Zwingli as a heretic after the latter’s death.” 2! In a letter
to Henry Bullinger, who inherited the leadership of the Zurich

faction from Zwingli, and with whom he desired to be at peace,
Luther declared that he had learned to esteem Zwingli as a very
good man after he had made his acquaintance at Marburg, and that

he mourned his death.??
On December 25, 1530, the Protestants at Schmalkalden protested
against the election of Ferdinand as king of the Germans, which
was desired by Charles V. This protest was a hostile act against the
Hapsburgs. In spite of it, Ferdinand was elected at Cologne on
January 5, 1531,

When the Schmalkaldians pleaded with the Emperor for the
abolition of the proceedings before the “Kammergericht,” they received an evasive reply, but one effect of their alliance was that

the term of April 15, which the recess of the diet of Augsburg had
fixed against them, was nullified. The Emperor was prevented from
interfering. Even the Catholic dukes of Bavaria, instigated by their

ancient hostility to the Hapsburgs, entered upon a formal alliance
with the Schmalkaldians against Ferdinand at Saalfeld. Alliances

with France, England, Denmark and Zapolya of Hungary were

sought partly by Bavaria and partly by Philip of Hesse, and were

all directed against the Emperor. The invasion of Hungary by the

Turks, however, and the menace of the latter to Germany, con-

stituted the greatest obstacle to the Emperor’s plans. It was political
and not dogmatic reasons that compelled Charles V to yield to the
schismatics.

There were prospects of a preliminary peace. The Protestants,

however, demanded that the peace should include all who in future
would declare their adherence to the Augsburg Confession. Even
Luther, writi.g to the Elector John, characterized this demand as
unacceptable to the Catholic party, because it would inflict too great

an injury upon them. He recommends that the opposition to Ferdinand
be abandoned for the sake of avoiding war. “Who would wish to
be guilty of so much bloodshed for the sake of such a cause?” 23
Finally, a treaty of peace, or, more correctly, an armistice, was
signed at Nuremberg on July 23, 1532. According to its terms,
21 Grisar, op. cit., IV, p. go.

22 May 14, 1538; Briefwechsel, XI, pp. 368 sq.

28 Prior to May 16, 1532; Erl. ed., Vol. LIV, p. 301 (Briefwechsel, 1X, p. 186).

412

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

nothing was to be done contrary to the existing religious status

until the assembling of a general council. The Protestants were even
assured in a secret agreement that the legal proceedings concerning
the confiscation of church property would be terminated. The terms
of this peace, however, were to apply only to present, not to future,
adherents of the Augsburg Confession.

In the same year, 1532, Charles V proceeded to Italy, where, in
February, 1533, he concluded an agreement with the Pope. Thence
he repaired to Spain. It was to the great disadvantage of the Catholic
cause in Germany that he did not return to the latter country until
nine years later.

The state of public affairs was not essentially changed by the demise
of two individuals. John, Elector of Saxony, who died in August,
1532, was succeeded in the government of his country by his son,
John Frederick, who was as devoted to the cause of Lutheranism as

his father had been. Pope Clement VII passed away in September,
1§34, and was succeeded by Cardinal Alexander Farnese, who assumed
the name of Paul III. The spirit of Catholic reform animated the latter
more intensely than it had Pope Clement, and he elevated determined
men to the cardinalate, such as Contarini, Pole, Sadoleto, and Caraffa.
His nepotistic inclinations, however, induced him to raise two relatives
to the dignity of the cardinalate, of whom one was only fourteen
and the other sixteen years of age. At the very beginning of his
pontificate, Paul IIl expressed himself in favor of convoking an
ecumenical council; but political complications prevented the execution of this plan for a long time. Shortly he sent Pietro Paolo
Vergerio as nuncio to Germany, in order to influence the Protestants
in favor of a council. The Elector John Frederick refused to make
a definite reply. It was decided to assemble the council in Mantua,
in May, 1537; but the prospects of a propitious meeting were meagre

because of the attitude of France and the threat of a Turkish invasion. The Protestants everywhere urged excuses for their nonparticipation in the ‘council, notwithstanding that they had always
clamored for one. Consequently in his circuit of the country Vergerio
experienced very little codperation, but was constrained to combat
the idea of holding a German national synod instead of an ecumenical
council.
On the day after Vergerio had entered Wittenberg, November 6,

1535, he invited Luther and Bugenhagen to breakfast with him in

THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

413

the Elector’s castle.?* He assuredly would not have invited Luther,
had he been better acquainted with him, or had he examined his
recently published work, “Certain Aphorisms against the Council of
Constance,” in which Luther indulged in the most disgraceful language about the Romish Church, “the mad, blood-thirsty, red harlot,”

and ““the dragon’s heads which peep out from the posterior of the
pope-ass.” The author of this offensive pamphlet availed himself of

the opportunity extended by the incautious papal legate, during
whose visit he delivered himself of insults to the Pope and the
Catholics, and boasted of his security in the possession of his new
doctrine.
In discussing the proposed council, Luther said to the papal legate: “I am
willing to lose my head, if I do not defend my teachings against the world.

This anger of my mouth is not my anger, but God’s anger.” He averred
that, though he and his followers were in no need of a council, he would
nevertheless attend it, in order to give testimony to the truth. He adverted
to “foolish and childish matters,” of which ecumenical councils treat in lieu
of matters of faith. He spoke of his “priests,” whom “Bishop” Bugenhagen,
who was present at this interview, was ordaining according to the command
of the Apostie Paul, and of a dozen other hateful things, among them that
“reverend nun,” his wife, who had borne him five children, of whom the

eldest, Hans, was going to be a great preacher of the gospel. He evidently
wished to irritate the nuncio and to confront Rome with an air of su~
perority.

Vergerio strangely attached great importance to Luther’s readiness to attend the council, and reported it with satisfaction to Rome. In this report

he also described the exterior appearance of Luther. He found him possessed
of a powerful frame, with exceptionally large features. Although he was past
fifty, Luther appeared to be but forty. His deportment displayed “arrogance,
malevolence, and lack of consideration”; he was “a man devoid of depth,
without judgment, a simpleton.” He wore a heavy golden chain around his
neck and several rings on his fingers. He was dressed in a doublet of dark
camelot, the sleeves of “which were trimmed with satin, over which he wore

a coat of serge lined with fox-fur. Luther himself informs us that he had

himself carefully shaved before the visit of the nuncio; it being necessary,
he says, to appear youthful to the legate, so that the latter might report to
his master that Luther was yet able to accomplish many things. In order to

create an impression, the ex-monk solemnly rode to the castle in a coach,—
“the German pope,” as he said to Bugenhagen, while they were riding, “and
Cardinal Pomeranus, instruments of God.” Vergerio closely observed him
24 For the following, see Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, pp. 424 sqq.

414

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

during the interview, especially his eyes, and writes in his report that, the

longer he watched his uncanny eyes, the more he was reminded of certain
persons who were regarded as possessed by the devil. He also claims to have
heard from former intimate friends of Luther certain discreditable facts
about the latter’s youth, but refrains from mentioning their nature.

The nuncio was no model of a circumspect and reliable ecclesias-

tical chargé d’affaires. Upon his return to Italy he succeeded in obtaining a bishopric. Subsequently, in 1548, he seceded from the
Catholic faith and embraced the new theology. After wandering
about restlessly, agitating against the papacy, he died at Tibingen
in 1565, unreconciled with the Church.

In the year in which Vergerio visited Germany in the discharge

of his legatine duties, the Schmalkaldic allies received a communica-

tion from Henry VIII of England, who had dragged his kingdom
into the schism. He wrote that he was not disinclined “to be admitted
into the Christian league of electors and princes.” It was a move
which was all the more gratifying to the Schmalkaldic League, since
that body had, on a former occasion, sought the friendship of this
powerful monarch. But the subsequent negotiations proved fruitless,
because there was no indication that the King could be induced to
embrace the Lutheran dogmas.
Relative to the divorce of Henry VIII, which constituted the cause and
occasion of the schism, Luther had previously proposed to the king a
surprising, nay, offensive solution. In an opinion on the permissibility of
divorcing Catherine of Aragon, the King’s legitimate wife, which Luther

delivered on September 3, 1531, he openly and candidly pronounced the mar-

riage of the King to be indissoluble, but, in order to satisfy the King, pointed

out that, with the permission of the Queen, he might “marry an additional

queen, in conformity with the example of the ancients, who had many
wives.” ** Owing to his narrow-minded pre-occupation with the Old Testament, Luther had gradually accustomed himself to regard bigamy as some-

thing to be permitted by way of exception also in the Christian dispensation.?® But it is not known that he granted this exception in a single

instance at any time prior to this embarrassing memorandum. Later on, how-

ever, he agreed to the bigamous marriage of Philip of Hesse, who in support
of his own cause expressly referred to Luther’s opinion in the case of
Henry VIIIL

28 Briefwechsel, 1X, p. 88; Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 3 sqq.
28 Op. cit., Vol. I1I, pp. 259 sqq.

THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

418

Melanchthon, on August 23, also declared in favor of the bigamous marriage of the King, saying: “The King may, with a good conscience (futissimum est regi), take a second wife, while retaining the first.” %7

Blinded by passion, Henry VIII insisted upon divorcing Catherine
and, in spite of the adverse decision of Rome, which refused to coun-

tenance

bigamy, married Anne Boleyn as his sole queen, cut
loose from the papacy, and, by means of his well-known brutal
measures, compelled the English clergy to submit in all spiritual
matters to his usurped ecclesiastical sovereignty.?8
As a result of fresh advances made to the Wittenberg theologians
through Robert Barnes, they were now induced to expect the King
to embrace the new doctrine. Luther eagerly hugged the delusion. He

wrote to Chancellor Briick that the King was “ready to accept the
gospel”; that it was necessary to avail themselves of this opportunity
of forming an alliance with him, since such a move would “throw
the papists into confusion.” Melanchthon received soo gold pieces

from Henry VIII for a work which he dedicated to him. “We have
at least received fifty,” Catherine von Bora said at that time with a
tinge of envy.2?? The execution in the year 1535 of those noble and
pious scholars, Thomas More and John Fisher, ordered by the ruthless tyrant who could not break their opposition, was sanctioned
by the Wittenberg theologians. Melanchthon asserted that the use
of violence against godless fanatics was a divine command.?® Luther
wrote to Melanchthon in the beginning of December, 1535: “One

is apt to fly into a passion, when one realizes what traitors, thieves,
murderers, yea, veritable devils the cardinals, popes, and their legates

“are. Would they had several kings of England to execute them.” *!
About this time, envoys of Henry VIII arrived at Wittenberg
and were gratified to learn that the theologians of that town, including Luther, had abandoned their view of the validity of the
former marriage of the King, which they now regarded as contrary

to the natural law. In the first months of 1536, articles were drawn
up, designed to effect an agreement with England in matters of

faith, which had been desired by the Protestants. In the judgment of
27 Op. cit., Vol. 1V, p. 5.

28 On the attitude of Pope Clement VII, see Grisar, op. cif., Vol. 1V, pp. 6 sq.
29 Tischreden, Weim. ed., Vol. II, n. 4957,

80 Corp. Ref., II, p. 928.

:

.

‘

31 Briefwechsel, Vol. X, p. 275: “Utinam baberent plures reges Angliae, qui eos occi-

derent.”’

416

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

their Protestant discoverer, these articles reveal “a surprisingly great
accommodation” even in most important questions, such as that of
good works.3? Luther describes them as “the extreme limit of what
could be granted.” Nevertheless, they were not accepted by the
English King. The prospects of an alliance with the Schmalkaldians
began to vanish. An additional reason was because the demands of
Henry VIII to have a commanding influence in the affairs of the
League appeared excessive to the others. The ambitious and agitated
members of the League, as well as Luther himself, believed that the
King intended to usurp the place of the Elector of Saxony in the

leadership of the anti-papal party in Germany.

Henceforth, the Wittenberg theologians were very indignant at

Henry.

Luther, in 1540, referred to him as a worthless wretch (nebulo).** To
Luther’s sorrow, his friend Robert Barnes was afterwards burnt at the stake
because he defended the Protestant doctrine on justification. Barnes incurred
the displeasure of the English tyrant also for the reason that he and Thomas
Cromwell had procured a fourth wife for him in the person of Anne of
Cleve; for the author of the English schism, who had divorced successively
Anne Boleyn and Jane Seymour, also became tired of Anne. In the year in
which Barnes was executed, Melanchthon wrote a letter to Vitus Dietrich,

in which he said, respecting Henry VIII: “How very true it is that there is
no sacrifice more acceptable to God than the killing of a tyrant. Would
that God might inspire some courageous man with this idea!” 34

But though the hopes of the Protestants regarding England were
shattered, their position was strengthened when Philip of Hesse
conquered Wiirttemberg. Philip wrested this country from Ferdinand
of Austria in 1534, by force of arms, in order to reinstate Duke
Ulrich, a follower of the Reformation, who had legitimately forfeited
the crown in 1519. Previous to Philip’s adventure, Luther, accord-

ing to his own oral report, had declared that the breach of the public
peace and the spoliation of Ferdinand were “contrary to the Gospel”
32 Words of G. Mentz; cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 9 sqq.
33 Tischreden, Weim. ed., Vol. IV, n. 5139.

3% Corp. Ref., HI, p. 1076: “Quam vere dixit ille in tragoedia, non gratiorem victimam
Deo mactari posse quam tyrannum. Utinam alicui forti viro Dcus hanc mentem inserat!”
On Luther and Cromwell, who was likewise executed, cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp.
I1sq.

THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

417

and “a stain upon our doctrine.” 3% After the Landgrave had subjugated that country, and, in view of the fact that the terms of the
- treaty with its equivocal religious article offered the best prospects
for the introduction of the new religion by Duke Ulrich, Luther
expressed his delight and congratulations to the Hessian court through
the preacher Justus Menius. “We rejoice,” he said, “that the Landgrave has returned in safety and with the coveted peace. God is

manifestly with this cause. Contrary to our common expectation,

He has transformed fear into peace! He who began this work will
also accomplish it. Amen.” 3¢ Luther also informed his friends that
the Landgrave; previous to his attack upon Wiirttemberg, had visited
the King of France and obtained from him a loan of 200,000 crowns

in support of the war.37

To the best of his ability, Ulrich complied with the expectations of

his friends and began to Protestantize his country.

In the year 1534, the Anabaptists obtained the upper hand at

Miinster by the well-known methods so characteristic of them. Their
triumph proved that Luther was not wrong when he suspected that
this furtive sect was capable of anything. Indeed, since the beginning
of the twenties, he might have learned a lesson from the sharp
criticism to which the Anabaptists subjected him. In many respects

this criticism was justified. It was largely based on religious grounds.
But the horrors which the capital of Westphalia was compelled to
suffer, the alleged divine revelations, the cruelties and the polygamy
of the Anabaptist sect, produced an outbreak of terrible fanaticism,

of which the new religion and Luther’s proclaimed Christian freedom
were not guiltless. The sectaries of Miinster now write—so Luther
indignantly exclaims—that “there are two false prophets, the Pope
and Luther, but of the two Luther is the worse.” 2® In his preface to

Urban Rhegius’ work against the Anabaptists of Miinster, Luther
pronounced a characteristic verdict upon them: “It is perfectly
evident that the devil reigns there in person, yea, one devil sits on

the back of another like the toads do.” 3°

When Miinster, after a siege, had fallen on June 25, and the reign

of terror had been ended by the execution of the ring-leader, John
35 Tischreden, Weim. ed., IV, n. 5038. °*
38 July 14, 1534; Briefwechsel, Vol. X, p. 63.

87 Tischreden, Weim. ed., Vol. IV, n. 5038, pp. 628 and 630.

88 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 419.
39 1bid,

418

LUTHER AND THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE

of Leyden, and his associates, Catholicism found its position in the
north somewhat strengthened.

To offset the growing popular sympathy in favor of the ancient
Church, the Protestants endeavored to fortify themselves by a more
intimate union of Lutheranism with the people of Upper Germany,
who in the eyes of the Lutherans, were still too much inclined towards
Zwinglianism. A complete understanding, especially on the question
of the Eucharist, was all the more urgent, since the religious peace
of Nuremberg was only temporary. The Landgrave of Hesse and
Martin Bucer of Strasburg were active in trying to conclude a more

intimate union with Lutheranism, without, however, wishing to abandon the Zwinglian denial of the Real Presence. Bucer endeavored
to deceive the others by resorting to ambiguous formulas. Both he

and Philip flattered themselves with the thought that they could succeed in inducing the people of Upper Germany and even those of

Switzerland to join a league of the followers of the new gospel.
“A union between us and the Sacramentarians is being attempted

with great expectations and longing,” Luther wrote in August, 1535.

He on his part was quite sincere in his intentions. On May 22 of the
following year, he had the satisfaction of seeing the representatives
of Strasburg, Augsburg, Memmingen, Ulm, Esslingen, Reutlingen,
Frankfort and Constance assemble in Wittenberg. They were accom-

panied by two Lutheran leaders, Menius of Eisenach and Myconius
of Gotha. Not one of the expected Swiss delegates appeared. All
present adopted the so-called “Wittenberger Concordie,” a product

of Melanchthon’s subtle pen.*® The articles followed Luther in
recognizing the practice of infant baptism and confession. The article
on the Eucharist affirmed that the body and blood of Christ were

“really and substantially” present in the Sacrament, so that even
the “unworthy” verily receive the body and blood of Christ. But
the interpretation which they placed upon the words showed that
the Upper Germans still clung to the view that Christ is present only
by that faith which even the “unworthy” may have and that He be-

stows on the communicant, not His flesh and blood, but merely His
grace. Even Melanchthon secretly adopted this interpretation in oppo-

sition to Luther.

The issue now depended upon Luther. For the nonce he was

contented with the closer union which the Upper Germans
had
40.0p. cit.,, Vol. I1I, pp. 421 sq.

THE RELIGIOUS PEACE OF NUREMBERG

419

achieved by means of the so-called “Wittenberg Concord.” By
various friendly letters to the Swiss he tried “to calm down, smoothe,
~and further matters for the best.” ! For the time he did not wish to
mention even to Bullinger of Zurich the doctrinal points in which
they differed. His attitude, otherwise so abrupt, waxed strangely
latitudinarian. It was similar to his conduct at the time of his
negotiations with the King of England. Undoubtedly, he thought

to himself—which might excuse him—that by considerate treatment the Zwinglians as a whole would gradually come over to his
side, in doctrinal matters, especially since the cities of Upper Ger-

many were in need of assistance. In this case, the wish was father to
the thought. Nevertheless, even Protestant biographers have found
Luther’s way of ignoring the differences inherent in the Concord to

be very peculiar,*? especially in view of the fact that he had looked
with suspicion upon Bucer’s artful endeavors (admonui enim ne
simularet) 43

Distrustful of the sincerity of the Swiss, he at first distrusted the so-called
Helvetian Confession, drafted in the beginning of 1536 by Bullinger, the
leader of the Zurich faction, with the aid of Bucer. But in May, 1538, filled
with happy expectations, he wrote to Duke Albert of Prussia: “Things have
been set going with the Swiss. . . . I hope God will put an end to this scandal, not for our sake, for we have not deserved it, but for His name’s sake,

and in order to vex the abomination at Rome; for they are greatly affrighted
and apprehensive at the new tidings.” *¢ Meanwhile, the Swiss “scandal” continued and disillusioned him painfully. Bullinger and Leo Judae, his associate at Zurich, persevered in their sharp opposition to Luther. Their letters
contain bitter denunciations of his doctrine and character.
Leo Judae continued to write in the tone which he had adopted in 1534,
when in a letter to Bucer he complained about Luther’s wanton distortion

of the teachings of Christ; the Apostle Paul, he said, would not have tolerated such a bishop. It was not sufficient for anyone to preach merely that
Christ is our salvation. Luther was guilty of disgraceful mistakes, and ignored and execrated everybody else. “Since the Apostolic age,” Leo continues,

“no one has discussed the most sacred things in a manner so disgraceful,
ridiculous, and irreligious as Luther.” And, whilst indulging in such con-

duct, he (Luther) set himself up for a pope. Was not a teacher to be judged
!
41 1bid., p. 422.
42 K sstlin-Kawerau, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 348.
48 Grisar, Luther, Vol. III, p. 421, note 1.
44 1bid., p. 423.

420

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

in the light of his writings? What would be left of Luther if he were to be
judged by his fruits, according to the saying of Christ? Do his aspersions
reflect moral grandeur? “I cannot imagine that his writings will meet with
the approval of anyone whose mind is not entirely perverted.” “I implore
the Lord Jesus that he make Luther mild and modest. May He bestow His
spirit and His love upon him, that he may discontinue his repugnant agita-

tion; or—take him from our midst.” *°

Luther’s subsequent provocative words against the Swiss and those

who shared their beliefs, such as Schwenckfeld, resulted in deepening
the rancorous sentiments of the Swiss. They were vexed, for instance, when he averred that Oecolampadius, a Zwinglian, was suddenly removed from this life by the devil. Bullinger discloses his
mind to Bucer on the “cynical, scurrilous language” of Luther. He
laments his insistence upon his own doctrines and the infallibility
of his own German version of the Bible, “which, after all, was prepared with too little freedom from prejudice,” etc.*® Later on Bullinger indulged in even more violent diatribes in his ““True Con-

fession.” In view of the declarations of such leaders among the Swiss
theologians, it is unintelligible how, in the nineteenth century, the
rulers of Prussia could urge the union of Lutheranism with the Calvinists (Zwinglians) under the name of the Reformed Evangelical
Church.
4. LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE (COMPLETED IN 1§34)

Luther’s perseverance in working on his German translation of
the Bible enabled him to publish a complete translation in 1534. It
was printed by Hans Lufft at Wittenberg, and bore the title: Biblia,

that is, the Entire Sacred Scriptures, Done into German by Martin
Luther, Wittenberg.
The New Testament had been edited by him in September, 1522,

twelve years previously, after the hasty labors begun during his
sojourn at the Wartburg. It was repeatedly revised in subsequent
editions. Meanwhile, the several parts of the Old Testament were
edited from time to time by the translator. When the entire Bible
4% Kolde, Analecta, p. 229; to which should be added, for purposes of consultation,
the

passages in Histor. Jabrbuch,

1919

(Lutheranalekten, IV), Pp-

§10 sqq., which have been

supplemented by me from Baum’s Collected Letters in the
Strasburg library.
48 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 409.

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

421

finally appeared, it contained Luther’s marginal notes, composed in
short sentences which were intended to explain the text or to render

its religious meaning intelligible to the reader. These notes expressed
the peculiar views of the editor. The different books were accompanied
by prefaces which embody remarkable explanatory and controversial
passages. The entire book was richly illustrated with wood-cuts.
In his preface to the book of Job, Luther discusses the pains it
required to make a German version of the Bible. “We all,” he says,

“Master Philip [Melanchthon], Aurogallus, and I, labored with such
care on Job that we were sometimes barely able to get through three
verses in four days.” . . . The reader “does not perceive what hindrances and stumbling-blocks lay in the path he now glides along as

easily as down a greasy pole. To us, however, it cost much toil and
sweat to remove all the hindrances and stumbling-blocks.” 47

The linguistic excellence of this German version, in contrast with
former translations, which were rather clumsy because too literal, is
so undisputed, even on the part of Catholic critics, that we need not
print any words of appreciation of it here. The immense influence

which this work exercised on the development of the German language is universally acknowledged. In his larger work on Luther, the
present author has treated of these excellent features extensively, and
discussed in detail the various phases of Luther’s Bible and its relation
to the medieval translations.*®

The linguistic advance was achieved in a twofold manner. In the
first place, Luther adopted the style of the Saxon curia, a purified

form of modern High German, which had developed since the middle
of the fourteenth century. He did not create this language, but made
the greatest contributions toward its propagation in virtue of the
popularity of his literary productions, and particularly his translation
of the Bible. In the second place, he infused into the language which

he had inherited, his own animated spirit, and popularized it by
listening to the genuinely colloquial expressions current among the
common people and introducing these into the literary language. He
himself tells us that he found it of the utmost service to “look into
the jaw of the man in the street,” i. e., to observe closely the speech
of the common people. In rejecting an inadequate expression, he was
47 Op. cit., Vol. V, p. 497.

48 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 494—546. Sce, however, J. M. Lenhart, O. M. Cap,,

« uther’s Indebtedness to the Catholic Bible” in Fortnightly Review, St. Louis, May, 1930,

pp. 103 ff.

422

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

apt to say: “No German speaks thus,” or “The German language
does not tolerate that.” 4?

Besides these linguistic characteristics, the method he employed had
two excellent features. He always takes pains to go back to the

original text of Sacred Scripture, whereas former translators had
invariably followed the Latin. Vulgate. In this respect Luther followed the humanistic tendency of his age. Credit is due to Erasmus
for having furnished the first great impulse to the study of the
original text of Scripture by his edition of the Greek New Testament.

The other excellence of Luther’s version consists in the clearness he
imparts by means of circumlocutions to such expressions as would
otherwise be difficult of comprehension. Thus he tried to make the
meaning clear to all. In doing so, however, he proceeded in an alto-

gether too arbitrary manner, but he succeeded
in making the Bible a
readable and popular book.
His translation had a remarkable sale, to which the celebrity of

the author and strong partisan interest naturally contributed no small
share. The latest bibliographer of Luther’s German Bible, Paul Pietsch,

notes 34 Wittenberg impressions of the Weimar Edition alone, and
72 reprints for the rest of Germany during the decade between 1530
and 1540; and again, from 1541 to 1546, the year of Luther’s death,

18 additional Wittenberg impressions and 26 reprints. It is believed,
according to rather reliable investigations, that the press of Lotther
at Wittenberg published no less than 100,000 complete Bibles from

1534 to 1584, to which must be added particularly the Bibles pub-

lished by the press of Lufft.’® One might almost say that Germany
at this time was deluged with Bibles. What a powerful influence
Luther’s German Bible must have exercised in enlivening disputa-

tions about religion, is obvious; it is equally obvious that it served
very much to fortify the existing prejudice that the ancient Church

had withheld the Bible from the people and that it was now necessary
to purify it by interpreting it in the light of Lutheran opinions.

To the end of his life, Luther devoted himself assiduously to the improvement of each subsequent edition of his German Bible. After 1539 special

meetings of scholars were held at Wittenberg to assist him with their
guistic or theological knowledge in polishing his translation. In

lin-

enumerating

49 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. so3. Cfr. Janssen-Pastor, Geschichte
des deutschen Volkes,
Vol. VII, 14th ed., 1904, p. 648. (English tr., Vol. XIV, PP. 401
3qq.)
80 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 498.

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

423

the names of the regular or occasional members of this “sanhedrin of the best
people,” Mathesius ° mentions Melanchthon, Bugenhagen, Jonas, Cruciger,

Matthew Aurogallus, teacher of Hebrew at the University of Wittenberg,
Bernard Ziegler, a learned Hebraist of Leipsic, and Dr. Forstemius of Tiibin-

gen. Luther’s experienced amanuensis, Rorer, usually kept the minutes of these
meetings. The Weimar edition of Luther’s works prints what is left of the
minutes of the sessions of this Bible-revision committee which met from 1539
to 1541. As a consequence of its labors, the Wittenberg Bibles published by

Lufft from 1540 to 1541 show a decided improvement.

The most celebrated edition of Luther’s German Bible was the so-

~called “Normalbibel,” which appeared in 1545. It was the last to
appear during his life-time. A facsimile of Luther’s handwriting
with parts of the Old Testament, which is reproduced in the section devoted to the “German Bible” in the new Weimar edition,
enables one to see with what diligence he filed and polished the text,

and how he often struggled to find the best expression for the

~ thought.

Passing from this more exterior appreciation of his work to its

intrinsic value as a translation, the so-called revised Lutheran Bible,
published in 1883, has shown what a large amount of textual corrections was necessary before Luther’s version satisfied the requirements
of modern critical scholarship. This edition not only eliminated many
errors, but also altered expressions no longer intelligible at the present
time. The revised editions which have appeared since 1883 were an
attempt at improving Luther’s work still more.’ Christian Josias

Bunsen (d. 1860), who was the author of a Protestant “Bibelwerk,”
said there were 3,000 passages in Luther’s Bible which call for revision.” 53 Discussing the defects of scholarship which remained even

after the revision of 1883, the learned Protestant philologist and
Bible expert, E. Nestle, said: “A comparison with the English or
Swiss work of revision shows how much farther we might and ought
to have gone.” 5 In 1885, the Protestant theologian and orientalist,
Paul de Lagarde, vigorously criticized the Lutheran text as well as
jts first jejune official revision of 1883. He prints a long list of pas51 1bid., pp. 499 sq.

-

52 A severe criticism of the official edition of 1913, by which the edition of 1892 was to

be improved, in the Christliche Welt, Marburg, 1913, p. 1010,
53 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. s11.

54 Ibid., pp. §11 sq.

424

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

sages which he holds to be manifestly mistranslations of the original,
some of which are arbitrary and evidently made for theological purposes.5?
Undoubtedly these theological variations constitute a serious defect
of Luther’s Bible, which diminish its value as a religious work. In the
interests of his new doctrine Luther took the liberty to alter the
sacred text without warrant. Dollinger’s numerous exposures relative
to this point met with the approval of Paul de Lagarde. Janssen has
once more called attention to them in his History of the German
People.5¢ The Protestant Paulsen in his Geschichte des Gelehrten Unterrichts criticizes Luther’s arbitrary alterations of the Biblical text.
Notwithstanding these criticisms, the mistranslations are retained in
the most recent popular editions of Luther’s Bible.
Thus, in the texts which treat of justification and the significance of the
law, Luther retouches the wording to suit his own doctrine. The law, according to his translation, “worketh only wrath”; “by the law only cometh
the knowledge of sin.” In Rom. IV, 1§ and III, 20 he interpolates the word

““alone.”

Again, Luther’s reproduction of Rom. III, 28 would have it that man is
justified by faith alone. In this passage, Luther arbitrarily inserted the word

“alone” and tried to justify this insertion as follows: “The text and the
meaning of St. Paul demand, nay, compel this amplification.” This, however,

is merely a requisite of his false theory, which he imputes to the Apostle in
order to square it with his own doctrinal system. The word “alone” in
the Pauline text is an obtrusive recommendation of Luther’s principal
heresy and a subjective falsification. The context makes it quite evident,

however, that, objectively speaking, the real thought of St. Paul could have
been expressed by the word ‘‘alone.” 57

In Rom. IIl, 25 sq., Luther again fortifies his doctrine by adding the

word “‘alone” and twice inserts the clause: “an offering of justice which
availeth before God,” which is not found in the original text. Luther falsely
translates Rom. X, 4: “For the end of the law is Christ; he that believeth in

him is righteous.” The same is true of Rom. VIII, 3, where the Greek text
is incompatible with the German rendition.
The illustrations above cited are all taken from St. Paul’s Epistle
to the
Romans.

The word “pious” is persistently and designedly substituted for
“just.”
55 1bid., p. s12.
56 Déllinger, Die Reformation, Vol. III, pp. 140 sqq.;
Janssen-Pastor, op. cit., Vol. VII,

14 ed., pp. 654 5qq.

87 For Luther’s hectoring justification of the “alone” see supra.

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

42§

Noe, Job, Zacharias, Elizabeth, Simeon, and Joseph, the foster-father of
Christ, are all pious, but not just, as in the original text. To be pious, according to Luther, is to have faith, and, through faith, imputed justice. He
does not admit real, personal justification. In like manner, Luther every-

where uses the word “congregation” instead of “church,” in conformity

with the tendency of his doctrine. In reproducing Bar. VI, 30, he ridicules
the “priests sitting in their temples with their voluminous copes, with shaven
faces and wearing tonsures.” %8

In addition there are interspersed glosses and prefaces to the several
sacred books which give him a fine chance for indulging in polemics.
~ He displays a truly marvelous dexterity in interpreting the text in
favor of his new doctrine. This is particularly true of his preface to
the Epistle to the Romans. ® In his commentary on the passage which
records the divine foundation of the primacy (“Thou art Peter,” etc.;

Matt. XVI, 18), he declares that in this passage “Peter” means *“all
Christians with Peter,” and the creed of the congregation is the rock
upon which the Church is built. The story of the anointment of

Christ by Mary Magdalen elicits the following comment from him:
“Thus one sees that faith alone makes the work good.” ¢° And so on.
After the appearance of Luther’s New Testament, the Catholic

ducal court of Saxony conceived the idea of publishing Luther’s work
without its distorted reflections on Catholic doctrine. Commissioned

by Duke George, Jerome Emser undertook this task, in 1527. The
conditions then prevalent in the publishing trade sanctioned such a

measure. Emser did not claim that the publication was a new trans-

lation. Luther’s grounds of complaint, both as a matter of fact and

in law, were unfounded, although the procedure is contrary to our

modern ideas. Moreover, the title merely announced that the New
Testament was “restored to its original sense” in this edition.®* Later

on, after Emser’s death, Augustine Alfeld published a reprint, which
bore the inaccurate title: ““The New Testament, translated into German by the late Emser.” The Catholics, however, were determined to
counteract Luther’s great success by means of other tranlations. In
1534, John Dietenberger, a Mayence Dominican, p.ublished a com-

plete translation of the Bible, in which he availed himself to a great
58 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 514 sq.

59 Op. cit.,, Vol. V, p. 526.
60 Op. cit,, Vol., V, p. s18.

‘
'

4

€1 On Emser’s German New Testament, cf. Grisar, Lutbgr. Vol. V, pp. s18sqq.

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

426

extent of Luther’s work. Dr. John Eck proceeded more independently in his German Bible of 1537, which, however, because of its

stilted style, found but few readers.

Cochlaeus complained that Luther’s work was highly regarded,
even among the common people; that cobblers and old women pored
over it and debated its arbitrary interpretations as if they were the

word of God.®*

The liberties which Luther took in his appraisal of entire books of
the Bible were fundamentally even more reprehensible than the defects which have been censured above. It is known that he did not feel

bound by the “canon” in force since the early days of the Church,
which tradition and the teaching magisterium had sanctioned, and

which decided what books constituted the Bible.®?

In addition to the illustrations already given, the following examples may
be adduced. The second book of the Machabees and the book of Esther were
rejected the former because it is “too much inclined to judaize,” the latter
on account of its “heathen naughtiness.” The Epistle to the Hebrews was
set aside as “a made-up epistle consisting of fragments amongst which,
there is wood, hay and chaff.” The Epistle of St. Jude the Apostle is
ranked “below the chief books [of the Bible].” The Apocalypse he regarded
as “neither apostolic nor prophetic” and said: “Let each one judge of it as he
thinks fit.”

He asserts that “the Epistle of St. James,” which has previously been discussed, “justifies [good] works,” and compared with other books of the
Bible, which (he maintains) clearly proclaim the doctrine of justification

by

faith

alone,

is

“but

an

epistle

of

straw,”

which

has

“nothing

evangelical about it.” Of this verdict, one of the most celebrated modern

Protestant Bible scholars, Theodor von Zahn, says that it is “an act of injustice as incomprehensible as it is regrettable.” ¢ It is quite comprehensible,
however, when one takes into consideration the stupendous levity with which
Luther regarded his doctrine as an infallible criterion.

In rejecting the canon of the Bible, Luther destroyed the basis on
which the authority of the Sacred Book had been founded. It was
tragic that no Christian writer ever inflicted so much damage upon
the Book of Books as the man who boasted of having favored it in so
62 Grisar, op. cit., Vol. V, p. 529.

83 1bid., p. 521.

eEYO., B. 523

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

427

high a degree and represented it as the great, nay, the sole source of
faith.
It is psychologically interesting to follow the motives and the
general ideas which guided Luther in the course of his protracted
work of translating Sacred Scripture, expressed in his own words.
He intends to show the “papists” that they are not competent to
translate the Bible properly, because they do not possess the “mind of
Christ,” and hence they ought to leave it “in peace” and undisturbed.®5
“It is not an easy matter,” he says, to find “others as sincerely devoted

to the Bible as we are here at Wittenberg, who have been the first to receive

the grace to reveal once more the Word of God, unadulterated and purified.”

“None of them knows how to translate correctly.” ¢ The new Bible, therefore, was to put the papists thoroughly to shame. Above all else, it was to
show how mistaken they were when they reduced it to a “code” for the
performance of good works, since it “condemns such works and demands
faith in Christ.” ¢7
Hence, Luther was preéminently swayed by a polemical purpose. He
wished to see the Bible read by everybody. Rich and poor alike should be
enabled to judge that his doctrine was the only true doctrine. Hausrath, a Protestant biographer of Luther, writing in complete accord with the
sentiments of his hero, says: “Only now could the burghers feel that they

had attained to manhood in the matter of religion, and that the universal
priesthood had become a reality. The head of each household now had the
wellspring of all religious truth brought to his very door. . . . For a while
this might lead to strange excesses, as the theology of the New Prophets
showed.” Still, “the advent of the German Bible was the dawn of freedom.” ¢®
It is easy to understand the conscious pride which filled Luther upon the
completion of his work. “St. Jerome and many others have made more mis-

takes in translating than we.” “I know that I am more learned than all the
universities, those sophists by the grace of God.” He invited those who

censured him to “do even the twentieth part” of what he had done. “Since
the Church has existed, we have never had a Bible like this one.”
Incidentally it is a real pleasure to him that he was able to rouse the fury
(furias concitare) of the papists by means of such a great work.®
85 Thus at the head of the edition of 1545.
68 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, pp. 526 sq.

87 1bid., p. 528.

.

88 Luther’s Leben, 1, p. 136; quoted by Grisar, ibid., p. 529.

89 Jbid., p. 331

428

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

He realized withal that he had to overcome many temptations whilst occupied with this work; thus he tells us that, whilst engaged in translating
the story of Jonas, he “looked into the belly of the whale, where everything
seemed given over to despair.”

Besides his habitual interior struggles he was oppressed with the idea that
his laborious task “would not be duly appreciated even by his own followers.” 7°

He felt an interior satisfaction, however, when he recalled that
his text counteracted the Jewish commentators, “who cannot know
or understand what is said by Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.”” 7*
The refutation of Jewish errors embodied in Luther’s Bible is a
satisfactory feature of his work.
Julius Kostlin declares that in his translation of the Bible, Luther
“bestowed on his German people the greatest possible gift” by making of the Book of Books “an heirloom of the whole German nation.”

The whole German nation? From what has been said above it can be
seen that Luther’s much-lauded translation was rather a piece of subjective propaganda put forth in the interests of his own party. And
as regards “his German people,” it was precisely while he was engaged in this work that he applied to the German nation opprobrious
epithets which place “the greatest gift” in a peculiar light. Thus the
reproaches of the Prophets inspired him to use the following language:
“I have begun the translation of the Prophets—a work that is quite
in keeping with the gratitude I have hitherto met with from this

heathenish, nay, utterly bestial nation.” 72

A word in reference to the illustrations which accompanied Luther’s
German Bible. The Catholics, who at that time still constituted a
majority of the German nation, were aggrieved to see how their
Church was ridiculed by the pictures contained in the complete Lutheran Bible of 1534, just as had been the case in the previously published New Testament. The polemical illustrations contained in the
New Testament were reproduced in the complete Bible. The Baby-

lonian harlot and the dragon once more appear crowned with the

papal tiara. On the title-page of the Wittenberg edition of Luther’s

complete works, issued by himself in 1541, there is a picture, presumably drawn by the elder Cranach, depicting the ancient Church
70 Ibid., p. 532.
1 ibid., p. 533.

12 1bid., p. 534.

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

429

in the act of driving men into hell; whereas the new Gospel leads
them to heaven.”® A furious looking devil in the shape of a beast,
with a cardinal’s hat on its head, and death in the form of a skeleton,
are depicted as driving a man, clad only in a loin-cloth, into the yawn-

ing abyss of hell, where the pope, crowned with the tiara, and two
other forms are burning. The obverse side of the picture glorifies the
new Church. John the Baptist leads a nude penitent to the Crucified

Savigur, from whose side a stream of blood gushes over a sinner who
has been saved by faith. Verily, the Catholics could not regard Luther’s Bible as “the greatest gift to his German nation.”
When the Catholic spokesmen took into consideration Luther’s

principles relative to the rank and use of the Bible, they regarded
themselves as justified in assuming an attitude of severe condemnation.”TM These principles contained within themselves the seeds of re-

ligious chaos. Luther held that beside, and in addition to, the words
of the Bible, the “spirit” was to be the true touchstone of orthodoxy.
The spirit would teach everyone to understand the sacred text. In case
of doubt, the interior “feeling,” which comes from above, must

assume the direction of reason. Everyone stands “for himself.” To the
pious, according to Luther, the Word of God is perfectly clear; but
he frequently emphasizes its obscurity. He holds that, owing to the
absurd interpretations of many obscure passages, the Bible must almost be styled “a heretical book.” Hence, in order to avoid theological
anarchy, he makes the self-contradictory demand that the interpretations of the Wittenberg school, i.e., his own tribunal, should always
be followed. The “external Word,” upon which he insists in opposition to the spirit of arbitrariness, is equivalent to his own word. Yea,

penalties are to be inflicted upon those who contemn the magisterium
exercised by himself.”®

It should not be overlooked, however, that Luther’s interpretation

of the Bible has the undisputed merit that, in contrast with the older
allegorical method of exposition, he always tries to establish the literal
sense, and for this purpose lays under contribution the study of languages. Not infrequently he employs to advantage the exegetical
works produced before his time, for instance, those of the celebrated
d its original size in Grisar and Heege,
,in
78 The frontispiece of 1541 is reproduce

Luthers Kampfbilder, Heft III, plate 9; cfr. the same work, pp. 19 sqq.
;
74 Cf., e. g., Johann Fabri, quoted in Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 529.
¢qq.
279
sqq.,
237
pp.
VI,
Vol.
sqq.;
420
sqq.,
387
pp.
IV,
Vol.
Luther,
75 Grisar,

430

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

Nicholas of Lyra. A well-known saying of his opponents was: “Si
Lyra non lyrasset, Lutherus non saltasset.”” 1f Lyra (the lyre) had
not played, Luther would not have danced.” Generally speaking,
however, Luther treated the Biblical lore of the past with such supreme
disregard that his neglect of the older commentators redounded to the
very great disadvantage of his own work. In addition to this scientific defect of Luther’s Bible, the Catholic is bound above all else to
take into account the fundamental detriment to exegesis resulting from
Luther’s abandonment of ecclesiastical tradition. Catholics believe
that the Church has been constituted by God the official interpreter

of Sacred Scripture. Her voice, resounding down the ages, is sufficient
guaranty that her children will not go astray in their study of the
Bible. Luther repudiated her guidance, to his own detriment as well
as to that of his followers, even of those who were sincere in their intentions and inclined to positive religion. He saw this fact with his
own eyes and bitterly rued it. He speaks with horror of the “rubbish
in Scripture.”

It is easy to refute Luther’s assertion that he “pulled the Bible from
underneath the bench,” where it lay buried, owing to its complete
misunderstanding under the papacy, and because it had been denied
to the laity and the clergy.”
Catholic exegetes are accused of having ignored the fact “that
Christ forms the true content of Scripture.” This accusation has been
refuted by a mass of quotations from writers like Augustine and
Thomas Aquinas, and also from Luther’s older contemporaries, such
as J. Perez of Valencia.”® Still more striking is the assertion that the
Bible was not read during the Middle Ages, nay, that its reading was
prohibited by the Church.
Frederick Kropatschek, a Protestant, states in his scholarly work,
Das Schriftprinzip der lutherischen Kirche (1904): “If everything
be taken into account, it will no longer be possible to say, as the old
polemics did, that the Bible was a sealed book to both theologians and
laity. The more we study the Middle Ages, the more this fable tends
to dissolve into thin air. . . . The Middle Ages concerned themselves
with Bible translation much more than was formerly supposed.” 7
78 Grisar, op. cit., Vol. V, p. s35.
77 1bid., pp. 536 sq.

T8 1bid., p. s41.

T8 1bid., p. 536,

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

431

Similar admissions could be cited from other Protestant scholars
such as Walther Kéhler, Ch. Nestle, J. Geffcken, W. L. Krafft, E.
v. Dobschiitz, O. Reichert, G. W. Meyer, A. Risch, etc.8® Above all
it is now agreed that the laity were never prohibited from reading the
Bible, as has often been alleged. It was only when there was danger
that the Bible would be abused during menacing heretical movements,
that the Church authorities from time to time adopted measures forbidding the laity to read the Bible. Historical researches show that the
Bible was widely circulated both in the original languages and in translations, in manuscripts and printed editions, in the age that preceded
Luther. On account of the importance of the subject, a synopsis of
these researches is hereby offered.
Wilhelm Walther of Rostock and Franz Falk, a scholarly clergyman of
Mayence, have devoted themselves with distinction to a study of this matter.
In recent times, a German-American scholar, W. Kurrelmeyer, has edited
in installments Die erste deutsche Bibel (The First German Bible), in the

Library of the Literary Society of Tiibingen; these installments are supplied
with critical contributions from all German translations prior to Luther.®
The oldest complete printed German Bible appeared in 1466 and was published by Mentel of Strasburg. It was followed by thirteen other editions,
some of which deviated to some extent from the first, but all appeared before the publication of Luther’s Bible. The name of the editor of the Bible
published by Mentel cannot be established with certainty. In consequence
of the republication of this version, its text had become a kind of German
Vulgate.

Dr. Falk has established the fact that no less than 156 different editions of the Latin Bible were printed in the period between 1450 and 1520.%

In addition, there are the many extant manuscripts, which have been classified by Walther, as well as numerous prints and manuscripts of separate
parts of the Bible, such as the Psalter and the Gospels and the Epistles of the
ecclesiastical year.

The latter, being lessons taken from the Old and the New Testament,

had been translated and collected in so-called *plenaria” or postils, which
were to be found everywhere in the hands of the faithful. In lieu of the complete Bible, which was expensive and only partially intelligible to many,
these postils supplied the people with reading material which was adapted
to their needs and was explained to them during divine service. In virtue of
80 Jbid., pp. 545 5q-

v

81 See Ch. Nestle in the Protestant Enzyklopadie fir Theologie, Erginzungsband XXIII,
p- 317.

82 Grisar, Luther, Vol. V, p. 536.

432

LUTHER’S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE

these “plenaria,” all classes of the people were well grounded in the most

essential and instructive portions of the Bible.

Relative to the partial and complete translations of the Bible, Se-

bastian Brant could truly say of the pre-Lutheran epoch: “Every
country is now filled with Sacred Scripture.” 83

The extant German translations of the Bible, particularly those contained in the “plenaria,” were by no means unknown to Luther. It
may also be assumed—in fact it has been specifically demonstrated in
many instances—that he made use of them more or less in his translation, as any scholar would have done when engaged in a similar

work. His merit of having proceeded in an independent manner remains undiminished, even if it is to be assumed that his translation
was influenced to some extent by a fixed German vocabulary expressive of Biblical words and phrases.®*
A remark remains to be made on the practical use of the Bible during the later Middle Ages. It was an abuse that the Bible was excessively allegorized, and that it was not sufficiently used in scholastic
disputations in comparison with philosophy; but it always retained its
prestige in the pulpit and religious literature. Popular devotional literature furnishes a striking refutation of the claim that the Reformation rescued the Bible from oblivion, even if the statistics and facts
which have been adduced above were unknown. The literature composed for the instruction and religious edification of the faithful is
replete both with Biblical passages and the spirit of the Bible; at times,
it is even excessive in its application of Holy Writ.
The legend of the chained Bible, which is occasionally encountered even
at the present time, is little less than grotesque. In Protestant popular tracts

young Luther’s discovery of the Bible at Erfurt is associated with the queer

notion

that the copy which he happened upon while a student was
fastened by a chain in the library. Copies of the Bible and other books in-

tended for the common use of the public were frequently chained, to safeguard them from unjustifiable appropriation or removal from the room in

which they were intended to be used. This very practical custom, still in

vogue at present in the parlors of Italian convents, has given rise to the
false notion that the Bible was kept chained in the Middle Ages.
83 1bid., pp.

536,

s40.

841bid., p. 460. On “Luther’s Indebtedness to the Catholic Bible” see J. M. Lenhart in

the Fortnightly Review, St. Louis, Mo., XXXVII, 5

(May, 1930), pp. 103 ff,

LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

433

5. LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

Among the writings which Luther composed during the years in

which he concluded his translation of the Bible, are many sermons

and scattered prefaces written for publications of his friends and
adherents. Popular religious treatises gradually become less frequent.
One of the more noteworthy of the latter bears the title, “A Simple Method of Prayer, for a Dear Friend, Master Peter, Barber”

(1535).8¢ This booklet, written at the solicitation of his barber, is an

appeal to all Christians who desire to lead a devout life, recommending
to them particularly meditation on the “Our Father” and the Ten

Commandments. Luther relates that he himself used passages from the
Pater Noster and sections of the Decalogue as fuel with which to
kindle 2 little fire within his heart. He was unfortunate in the selection of his addressee; for Barber Peter stabbed his son-in-law in the
following year. Owing to Luther’s intercession, the sole punishment

meted out to him was exile.

A more voluminous and important treatise is that on the morals of
princes and courtiers, published in 1534, under the title, “Psalm 101,
with a Commentary by M. Luther.” ¥ In this work Luther vigorously reminds the upper classes of their duties, bewails the decline
of morality in Germany, and points to intemperance as a hereditary
evil. If every nation has its own devil, he says, the German devil must

be a good wine-skin. At that time it was a prevalent custom at the
Electoral court to indulge in riotous drinking bouts. The new Elector,
John Frederick, was not the last one who might profit from Luther’s
admonition. In one of his Table Talks Luther expressed himself about
his protector thus: “He is possessed of every virtue; but just fancy
him swilling like that!” 8 Duke Henry of Braunschweig-Wolfenbiittel openly denounced the Elector as an inebriate, whereat the latter
wrote a letter admitting his inebriety, «,fter the German custom,”

fault,
but said the Duke of Braunschweig was not the man to find to
the
refers
n
occasio
one
on
for he was an even harder drinker. Luther
y
nightl
a
after
ng
morni
the
appearance of the Electoral courtiers on
pp. 214 s5qq.
88 Weimar ed., Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 358 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXXIII, ed.,
Vol. XXXIX, pp.

87 Weimar ed., Vol. LI, pp. 200 sqq. and L‘III, pp. 679 sqq.; Erl.
¥V, p. 203.
88 Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. IV, n. 49333 cfr. Grisar, Luther, Vol.

265 sqq.

Steinhausen (Kulturgeschichte der Deutschen, p. 508) calls John Frederick quite simply
drunkard.

a

434

LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

carousal, and says that their heads appeared to have been immersed in
salt brine during the night.
A work to which Luther was sincerely devoted was his exposition of
the Epistle to the Galatians, which he composed in Latin in 1535. It
was well known that he deemed this Pauline Epistle to be the grand
citadel of his doctrine.
In 1533 he produced his controversial work, “On the Corner-Mass
and the Ordination of Clerics,” 8 which his friend Jonas characterized
as an effective battering-ram against the papacy. The opposition which
his neighbors offered to the innovations he had introduced into the

divine service, was the occasion which once more induced him to attack the Mass, so dear to all good Catholics. The fiction of his noc-

turnal disputation with the devil, which he elaborated with great

skill in this book, has become famous. The devil tries to make Luther
despond because he was guilty of saying many Masses whilst still
a monk, and therefore, was guilty of sacrilege. The abomination of the
Mass is cleverly explained by the devil, and Luther’s excuses are repudiated; he is told that he must regard himself as lost in the sight
of God. He says it required his utmost efforts to retain hope for his
own salvation whilst repenting of his former blindness. Some Catholic
apologists have erroneously assumed that this clever bit of fiction was
a confession on Luther’s part that his objections to the Mass had been
inspired by the devil. To the attentive reader, the objections are discernible as typical of Luther, but the disputing devil is a literary
device and the overwhelming fear by which Luther pretends to have
been suffocated, is pure fiction. Luther expresses the wish that all who
celebrate Mass be afflicted by a similar mental agony. Such is the

punctum saliens of the much discussed disputation.

In his treatise “On the Corner-Mass” Luther repudiated both the
sacrificial character of the Mass and the Real Presence of Christ on

the altar without communion. This was explained by some of his
friends in the sense that, like the Sacramentarians, he denied that
Christ became really- present in the Eucharist by virtue of the words

of institution. In the beginning of 1534 he explained this point

89 Weimar ed., Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 183 sqq.; Erl. ed., Vol. XXXI,
pp. 307 sqq. Cfr. Grisar,
Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 518 sqq. “Corner-Mass” (Winckelmesse) is a contemptuou
s term applied
to the Mass because, according to Catholic doctrine, it is equally
valid whether celebrated
by the priest alone in a lonely chapel or amid a concourse
of faithful who unite their
prayers with his and communicate with him.

(Grisar, op. cit., Vol. IV, pp. s193q.),

LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

435

in a published letter,®® in which he contended that Christ was not
present in private Masses, when the priest was the sole celebrant, be-

cause there was no communion of the faithful; and that the Eucha-

rist, because it was essentially a food, was to be distinguished from the
Mass, just as God is to be differentiated from the devil. “May God”—

this is his prayer—*“may God bestow upon all pious Christians cour-

age, so that, when they hear the word Mass, they may bless themselves:
as if they were in the presence of a Satanic abomination!” !

Luther’s work, “On the Servile Will,” which he launched against
Erasmus, was answered by the latter in a vigorous and triumphant

pampbhlet, entitled “Hyperaspistes,” published in 1526. It was an ingenious exposure of the heresies and distortions of Luther.

For a long time Luther was silent, without, however, recovering from
the blow which had been administered to him. He was very much pained at

the secession of the Erasmian humanists from his party, maintaining that he
was justified in being angry at Erasmus because the latter, although professedly a member of the Church, minimized, nay, destroyed the essence of
the Christian religion by his strictures, couched in playful and polished form.
In the course of an embittered conversation, in 1532, he called Erasmus “a
rogue by nature,” who regarded the Blessed Trinity as ridiculous, and added:

“Erasmus is as certain that there is no God, as I am certain that I see.”
Although that charge was a product of his hateful imagination, Luther continued to indulge in similar declarations until he finally believed them himself.

A letter from his old friend, Nicholas Amsdorf of Magdeburg, caused him
to vent his pent-up wrath. On January 28, 1534, Amsdorf wrote him a
letter, composed with his customary fervor, in which he said he could observe the “intervention and the miracles of God” in favor of the Gospel
all around him. God, he said, produced the faith, just as He had wrought

the Resurrection of Christ. George Witzel, Luther’s enemy, who attacked
the gospel of salvation, he said, was dependent upon Erasmus, from whom
he borrowed all his weapons. Erasmus would have to be “thoroughly unmasked” by Luther “on account of his ignorance and malice.” He (Ams-

dorf) advised Luther to perform this task in a book on the Church, since
the attitude of the Erasmian party towards the Church constituted their
vulnerable spot.

90 Weimar ed., Vol. XXXVIII, p. 262; Erl. ed., Vol. XXXI, p. 377.
91 Briefwechsel, Vol. X, pp. 8 sqq.; about March 11, 1534.

436

LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

Luther was immensely pleased with Amsdorf’s letter, but, being
occupied with other matters, deferred writing the suggested treatise
on the Church until 1539. However, he forthwith printed Amsdorf’s
letter and accompanied it by a furious attack upon Erasmus in the
form of a reply to his friend at Magdeburg.®? Resorting to the worst
kind of distortions and disparagements, he tries to demonstrate. that

the sole purpose of Erasmus was to bring all Christian doctrine into
disrepute, that he was another cynical Democritus, a second Epicurus.
Melanchthon, in a letter to Erasmus, pronounced the rash publication
of Luther’s reply a lamentable blunder. Another friend of Erasmus,

Boniface Amerbach, characterized Luther’s pamphlet as “the product
of a diseased brain” and asserted that Luther had been suffering
from paresis (cephalea) for more than a year.®
The calumnies which Luther had heaped upon the aged scholar of
Rotterdam were too monstrous for him to leave unanswered. He gave
vent to his indignation in a sarcastic Latin rejoinder: “Purgatio adver-

sus Epistolam non Sobriam M. Lutheri”” ¢ He treats Luther as one
who is drunk or mentally unbalanced. He convicts him of a long
series of bare-faced lies. In his indignation, the maltreated scholar asserts that “no text is safe against his violent distortions, based upon
premeditated calumny.” Rather than admit the justice of Luther’s
malevolent charge that Erasmus was bent upon fostering infidelity,
“the world will believe that Martinus has become demented through

hatred, or that he suffers from some other mental disorder, or is dominated by an evil spirit.”
Thereafter Luther preferred to observe silence in public; but in the company of his intimates, he expressed himself harshly about Erasmus. “This
man,” he said, “simply insists on believing what the pope believes”; but,
“the Italians are hypocrites.” “I fear,” he also said, “that he [Erasmus] will

die a wretched death.” Not long afterwards, in 1536, Erasmus died in the
city of Basle, where, due to the prevalence of the new religion, he was unable
to receive the last Sacraments. He passed away, loyal to his religion and

filled with sincere piety, as even the reports to Wittenberg announced, add-

ing that his last words were: “I will bless the mercy of the Lord and His
judgments.” Luther did not wish to believe this, and in his Table Talks
represents Erasmus’s death as that of an unbelieving Epicurean. “He lived
92 Grisar, Luther, Vol. IV, pp. 181 sq.
93 Jbid., pp. 182 sq.
"""‘* Amerbach had judged Luther’s attack “insane”; Erasmus, on his part, addressed his
biting reply to “one not sober.” (Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1V, p, 184.)

LUTHER’S LITERARY ACTIVITY

437

in 2 presumptuous security,” he said, “and thus died

(securissime vixit,

sicut etiam morixit).” As late as 1544, Luther derisively says of Erasmus:

“He passed away sine crux et sine lux”—without the Cross and without

light.®s

The great and decisive convention of the Schmalkaldic League assembled February 9, 1537, a year after the death of Erasmus.
95 Grisar, Luther, Vol. 1V, p. 185; Tischreden, Weimar ed., Vol. IV, n. 3963; 4028; 4899;
§670.

CHAPTER XV

SESSION OF THE SCHMALKALDIC LEAGUE, 1537.
LITERARY BATTLES. LUTHER’S CO-WORKERS
I.

THE

SCHMALKALDIC

ARTICLES.

REPUDIATION

OF

THE

PROPOSED

GENERAL COUNCIL BY THE SCHMALKALDIANS

In view of the prevailing conditions, in particular the attitude of
France, the prospects of summoning an ecumenical council, which

had been the object of Vergerio’s negotiations with Luther, were
rather unfavorable. Nevertheless, Paul 1II, who was intent upon reform and the defense of Catholicism, adhered to the project and
fixed the date of the council for May 23, 1537. Mantua was designated as the city where the council was to assemble. For the purpose

of definitively winning over the Protestants to the idea of an ecumenical council, the Pope ordered Van der Vorst to visit Germany
as his legate. The Emperor, who had intended to convoke a national
council, for a while contemplated making concessions to and peaceful
covenants with the estates who adhered to the new religion, in order
to gain their assistance in his campaign against the Turks. But when
it had been announced that the great convention of the Schmalkaldic
League was to be held on February 9, 1537, Charles V sent his coun-

cilor Held to persuade the Protestants tc participate in the council
which they had so often demanded. Vergerio, the papal nuncio, also
hastened to Schmalkalden.
Meanwhile the strength of the League had increased. The agreement
was renewed for a period of ten years. Accompanied by a large retinue, the Protestant princes and the representatives of the cities entered the small town of Schmalkalden. They were accompanied by a
large number of theologians—Ilarger than any that had yet appeared
at a similar assembly. It was intended that the convention should be
not only extraordinarily solemn, but also decisive. Elector John Frederick of Saxony, an enthusiastic follower of Luther, would have preferred if the latter had issued a summons for a council of his own,
438

